SOURCE: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/146906256/
SCRAPED: 2026-02-18T10:27:23.949174
TITLE: Full Document
================================================================================

[Cites
40
, Cited by
0
]
Delhi High Court
Sanjeev Kumar Chawla vs The State on 20 February, 2020
Author:
Anu Malhotra
Bench:
Anu Malhotra
*IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                    Judgment reserved on :19.02.2020
                    Date of decision :20.02.2020

+     CRL.M.C. 870/2020 & CRL.M.A.No. 3517/2020
SANJEEV KUMAR CHAWLA                            ..... Petitioner
                   Through:   Mr. Vikas Pahwa, Sr. Advocate with
                              Mr.Vineet Malhotra, Mr. Vishal
                              Gohri, Mr. Hemant Shah, Mr.
                              Shubhendu Kaushik, Mr. Vidushi
                              Nishank, Mr. Sumer Singh, Mr. Syed
                              Arham Masud, Mr. Ansh Kukreja, Mr.
                              Prashant Goswami, Mr.Shadman and
                              Mr.Varun Bhati, Advocates.
                        Versus
THE STATE                                       ..... Respondent
                   Through:   Mr. Sanjay Jain, ASG with Mr. Harish
                              Vaidyanathan Shankar (CGSC), Mr.
                              Ashray Behura, Mr. Sanjay Lao
                              (ASC) and Mr. Kewal Singh Ahuja,
                              APP for the State with Dr.G.Ram
                              Gopal Naik, DCP/Crime, Inspector
                              Keshav Mathur, Inspector Gagan
                              Bhaskar, Crime Branch.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ANU MALHOTRA

                              JUDGMENT
ANU MALHOTRA, J.
1.    The petitioner Sanjeev Kumar Chawla, a citizen of the United
Kingdom herein is arrayed as accused No.4 in the final report under
Section 173
of the Cr.P.C., 1973 filed by Inspector, Crime Branch
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                     Page 1 of 76
dated 22.07.2013 in FIR No.111/2000, PS Chanakya Puri in the Court
of the learned CMM, PHC, New Delhi for the alleged commission of
the offences punishable under
Sections 420
/
120-B
of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860 in relation to an alleged conspiracy to fix matches during
the India-South Africa Cricket series played through February-March,
2000 in alleged connivance with Mr.Hansie Cronje, Captain of the
South Africa Cricket Team (who has since expired on 01.06.2002 in
an air crash and against whom the proceedings have abated), with
allegations against the petitioner herein to the effect that qua the five
one day matches and three test matches played in the said India-South
Africa series with ODI Matches having been played at Cochin,
Jamshedpur, Faridabad, Vadodara and Nagpur with three test matches
played at Mumbai and Bangalore,- the petitioner herein was allegedly
the main conduit in the said match fixings and whilst allegedly
committing the said crime, stayed in the same hotels where the teams
were staying and allegedly gave money, mobile phones and
transferred money into the accounts of the accused Mr.Hansie Cronje
(since deceased) and was in regular contact with the accused persons
namely Rajesh Kalra @ Rajesh, Krishan Kumar, Sunil Dara @ Bittoo
and Manmohan Khattar and Mr.Hansie Cronje (since deceased).
2.    As per the averments made in the police report under
Section
173
of the Cr.P.C., 1973, submitted by the Crime Branch, whereas the
three accused persons i.e. Rajesh Kalra @ Rajesh, Krishan Kumar and
Sunil Dara @ Bittoo were arrested, the present petitioner Sanjeev
Chawla @ Sanjay and Manmohan Khattar allegedly absconded with
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                         Page 2 of 76
the present petitioner having left for the United Kingdom and the co-
accused Manmohan Khattar having left for Canada/USA.
3.    Vide order dated 23.07.2013, cognizance of the offence
punishable under
Sections 420
/
120B
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860
was taken by the learned CMM, PHC, New Delhi in relation to FIR
No.111/2000,PS Chanakya Puri which had been registered in relation
to the aforementioned alleged conspiracy of match fixing of the
matches of the India-South Africa Series in 2000 and summons to
accused Nos.1, 2 & 3 i.e. Rajesh Kalra @ Rajesh, Krishan Kumar,
Sunil Dara @ Bittoo were directed to be issued with directions to the
Investigation Officer to take appropriate steps for securing the
presence of the accused no.4 i.e. the present petitioner and the accused
no.5 Manmohan Khattar who were stated to be absconding.
4.    A submission had been made on 23.07.2013 by the
Investigation Officer of the case that steps would be taken qua
extradition proceedings qua the present petitioner as well as for
Manmohan Khattar. The present petitioner has since been extradited to
India from the United Kingdom and on 12.02.2020 at 8.30 PM GMT
(02-00 hours of 13.02.2020 IST) and was handed over to the escort
team comprising of Dr.G. Ram Gopal Naik, DCP/Crime STARS-I in
STF, Inspector Keshav Mathur and Inspector Gagan Bhaskar by the
Metropolitan Police London at Bay No.B-43, Heathrow Airport,
London, U.K. and had been arrested in this case and reached on
13.02.2020 at 11.00 hours IST at the IGI Airport and was thereafter
was got medically examined at the Safdarjang Hospital vide MLC
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                        Page 3 of 76
No.63117 at 15.08 hours and produced before the learned ACMM,
PHC, New Delhi where the case is now pending trial.
5.    An application was thereafter filed by the State seeking the
grant of 14 days police custody of the petitioner herein for confronting
him with the evidence allegedly collected against him and to unearth
the conspiracy and to find out the details of the persons who were
involved in order to give the petitioner herein a fair trial and to file the
supplementary charge sheet against the accused as submitted on
19.02.2020videthe status report filed by the State under the signatures
of Mr. Manoj Dixit, Assistant Commissioner of Police, STARS-I,
Sector-8, R.K. Puram.
6.    Vide the impugned order dated 13.02.2020, the prayer made by
the State seeking the police custody remand, was granted to the extent
of remanding the petitioner to police custody for 12 days. The
impugned order also indicates that the prayer made by the State
seeking the police custody remand of the petitioner contended to the
effect that the petitioner herein is the main person who was involved
in match fixing cases regarding which the FIR No.111/2000, PS
Chanakya Puri was lodged and that in as much as, whereas, the three
other co-accused i.e. Rajesh Kalra @ Rajesh, Krishan Kumar, Sunil
Dara @ Bittoo had been arrested, the present petitioner had fled to the
United Kingdom and absconded at the time of the filing of the charge
sheet and thus, he having been extradited from the United Kingdom
and having been arrested and brought back to India, his police custody
remand was required, in as much as, the present petitioner was
required to be taken where he stayed at the places in the same hotels
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                            Page 4 of 76
where the teams stayed where the five one day matches and three test
matches were played i.e. at Cochin, Jamshedpur, Faridabad, Vadodara,
Nagpur, Mumbai and Bangalore and that the petitioner had also to be
confronted with the places where the matches were held and that the
money transfer from the said places had also to be verified.
7.    The avowed contention raised on behalf of the petitioner herein
urged before the learned Trial Court was to the effect that in terms of
the Letters of Assurances of the Government of India, the petitioner
had to be kept at the Tihar Jailcomplex, Delhi during the pre-trial
detention and in the event of the prison sentence upon conviction also
and that thus, the petitioner could not be remanded to police custody
and that the charge sheet having been filed, the police could not
investigate the matter without permission of the Court with it having
also been submitted before the learned Trial Court on behalf of the
petitioner that in as much as, the extradition proceedings had
commenced earlier and bail had been granted to the petitioner at
London and therefore, the period of 15 days from his arrest in London
having expired, no police remand could be granted.
8.    The learned Trial Court vide the impugned order observed to
the effect that though, arrest warrants had been issued for the
petitioner herein, he had been granted bail in the United Kingdom and
was subsequently arrested on 12.02.2020 at 8.30 PM GMT at Bay
No.B-43, Heathrow Airport, London, U.K. and had thus not remained
in custody even for a single day and thus placing reliance on the
verdict of the Hon'ble High Court of Bombay in "
Alim A. Patel Vs.
State of Maharashtra
" 2011 (2) AIR BOM R 271, the accused could
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                        Page 5 of 76
be remanded to police custody even after 15 days excluding the period
of bail, with it having been further observed to the effect that in any
event, the present petitioner had been arrested on 12.02.2020 and there
was no bar to the grant of the police custody remand.
9.    The learned Trial Court also observed to the effect that as per
the Letter of Assurance dated 22.09.2017, the Government of India
had assured that the petitioner would be kept at the Tihar Jailcomplex,
Delhi during the pre-trial detention and upon conviction by the
Competent Court but that the stage of pre-trial did not include the
stage of investigation and that the police custody remand sought, was
thus held vide the impugned order to be not against the spirit of the
letter of the Government of India dated 22.09.2017. The learned Trial
Court further observed to the effect that it was settled law that the
police did not require any permission from the Court for further
investigation and in as much as, in the instant case, places at Cochin,
Jamshedpur, Faridabad, Vadodara, Nagpur, Mumbai and Bangalore
were to be visited by the police, the grant of 12 days police custody
for the said investigation to be conducted further would suffice.
10.   Vide the present petition, the petitioner has submitted that the
learned Trial Court had failed to appreciate, consider and take into
account the three Letters of Assurances dated 28.02.2017, 22.09.2017
and 11.06.2018 of the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India
whereby, the Government of India had given a solemn and sovereign
assurance that at all times and during pre-trial custody, the petitioner
would be lodged at the Tihar Jail complex, Delhi and that thus, no
police remand could be granted and that the petitioner had been
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                         Page 6 of 76
extradited from the United Kingdom only to face trial and not for any
investigation. Furthermore, it was submitted on behalf of the petitioner
that the petitioner having been in custody since 2016 when he was first
arrested and produced before the Magistrate pursuant to warrants of
arrest issued by the ACMM in terms of
Section 105A
of the Cr.P.C.,
1973, no police custody of the petitioner could be granted.
11.   It was further submitted on behalf of the petitioner that in as
much as, the charge sheet had been filed by the State, no leave of the
Court having been taken by the State at the time of the filing of the
charge sheet nor at the stage of taking the cognizance nor thereafter
for further investigation, the prayer made by the State seeking the
grant of the police custody remand could not have been granted.
12.   The avowed contention reiterated on behalf of the petitioner by
the learned senior counsel i.e. Mr. Vikas Pahwa, Sr. Advocateis that
the extradition had been granted only on the basis that the petitioner
was being extradited to face trial and not for any investigation and
thus, no investigation could be carried out nor permitted and that the
pre-trial detention of the petitioner could only mean detention at the
Tihar Jail and nowhere else as had been stated by the Government of
India. The petitioner thus submitted that the custody of the petitioner
with the police authorities was wholly illegal and could not be
permitted to continue and that the guidelines for extradition as issued
by the Ministry of External Affairs, CPV Division (Extradition
Section) and as per the manual of the CBI, had been wholly
overlooked.
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                        Page 7 of 76
13.    It was also submitted through the petition that Clauses 9 & 10
of the Guidelines for Extradition issued by the Ministry of External
Affairs of India, which read to the effect:-
"9. Competent authority should countersign copy of
      charge sheet, which is enclosed with the documents.
10. A letter/order from the concerned Court justifying
      accused person's committal for trial on the basis of
      evidence made available in the Charge Sheet, with a
      direction seeking accused person's presence in court to
      stand trial in said court from the country of present stay.",

categorically spelt out that the extradition could be granted only for
the trial on the basis of the evidence made available in the charge
sheet and not for the purpose of any investigation and that even in the
Court at London, the State had submitted that the charge sheet had
been filed and that thus, the petitioner was being extradited to India
only to face trial and not for any investigation purposes.
14.    An extradition warrant as a warrant of arrest dated 27.02.2015
was issued by the learned CMM, PHC, New Delhi against the
petitioner, which was to the effect:-
"Whereas SANJEEV KUMAR CHAWLA @ SANJEEV
        CHAWLA @ SANJAY CHAWLA @ SANJAY S/O SH.
MELA RAM CHAWALA R/O 4, Monk Villa Avenue
        London NW110AH Also at 'East is East' Restaurant
        230, Commercial Road, London E12NB (UNITED
        KINGDOM) stands charged with the offence
u/s
        420
/
120B
Indian Penal Code vide Case FIR No
        111/2000 Dt 06.04.2000 U/s 420/120B
IPC
Police
        Station Chanakyapuri, New Delhi. You are hereby
        directed to arrest the said SANJEEV KUMAR
        CHAWLA @ SANJEEV CHAWLA @ SANJAY
        CHAWLA @ SANJAY and produce him before me."
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                             Page 8 of 76
15.         The   Letters   of   Assurances   dated   28.02.2017    bearing
F.No.25015/56/2016-LC, 22.09.2017 bearing No. 25015/56/2016-
LC(Vol.II) & 11.06.2018 bearing No.25015/56/2016-LC (Vol.II) as
issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, the
Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India sought extradition of
the petitioner herein as under:-
(I)
      "F.No.25015/56/2016-LC                     dated 28.02.2017

            The Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, New
      Delhi presents its compliments to the Home Office, Government
      of United Kingdom and the Competent Judicial Authorities in
      United Kingdom.
2. The Government of India has sought extradition of Mr.
      Sanjeev Kumar Chawla @ Sanjeev Chawla @ Sanjay Chawla @
      Sanjay from United Kingdom to face trial in India in Case FIR
      No. 111/2000, under
section 420 (Cheating)
and
Section 120-B
(Punishment of Criminal Conspiracy) of
Indian Penal Code
. It
      is learnt that extradition proceedings for surrender of Mr.
      Chawla have advanced before the first instance court; the
      Westminster Magistrates' Court.
3. Mr. Chawla is likely to be held at the Tihar jail complex in
      New Delhi, if extradited. In this regard it is stated that:
(a) As per Delhi Prison Rules, 1988 the prisoners are kept in a
      dormitory (barracks) or cell subject to the circumstances of the
      case and keeping in mind the safe custody, health and comfort
      of the prisoners.
(b) All the prisoners are supplied necessary blankets and bed
      sheet for the purpose of using it as mattress and bedding. In case
      there is medical requirement for a prisoner, mattress and
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                           Page 9 of 76
bedding is provided to him/her as per the recommendation of the
   Medical Officer.
(c) Every prisoner is provided with adequate quantity of clean
   potable drinking water to meet his daily requirement. It may be
   mentioned here that in Jail canteen bottled drinking water is
   also available for the prisoners on reasonable price.
(d) Every ward of Delhi Prisons has sufficient number of toilets
   to meet the daily requirement of the prisoners. Moreover,
   barracks / cell also have toilets to cater to the need at the time of
   lock-up.
(e) In Delhi Prisons almost every ward has sufficient space/yard
   attached therewith, where the prisoners can have benefit of
   sunlight, fresh air and other recreation activities.
(f) As per Delhi Prison Rules, every prisoner is provided three
   time meals/adequate food throughout his detention period. It
   may be mentioned here that only vegetarian food is provided to
   the prisoners. From the prison canteen inmate can purchase
   eatables, snacks etc.
4. If Mr. Sanjeev Chawla is extradited to India and his case Is
   acceded for lodging in Delhi Prisons by the Competent
   Authority/Government, the Government of India, on the basis of
   information received from the Government of National Capital
   Territory of Delhi and Tihar Prisons Authorities, solemnly
   assures that all such facilities available in Delhi Prisons shall be
   provided to him without any discrimination as per lodging policy
   in vogue.
5. The Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, New
   Delhi, avails itself the opportunity to renew to the Home Office,
   Government of United Kingdom and the Competent Judicial
   Authorities in United Kingdom the assurances of its highest
   consideration."
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                          Page 10 of 76
(II)

   "No. 25015/56/2016-LC(Vol.II)             dated 22.09.2017
         The Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, New
   Delhi presents its compliments to the Home Office, Government
   of United Kingdom and the Competent Judicial Authorities in
   the United Kingdom,
2. The Government of India seeks the extradition of Mr. Sanjeev
   Kumar Chawla @Sanjeev Chawla @ Sanjay Chawla@ Sanjay
   from United Kingdom to face trial in India inCase FIR
   No.111/2000 under
Section 420 (Cheating)
and
Section 120-B
(Punishment of Criminal Conspiracy) of
Indian Penal Code
.
   Extradition proceedings for surrender of Mr.Chawla have
   advanced before the first instance court; the Westminster
   Magistrates' Court.
3. In relation to concerns on Mr. Chawla's prison conditions
   and minimum standards ofdetention, the Government of India
   solemnly provides the following assurances to the
   Britishauthorities.
4. The Government of India, in addition to earlier assurance
   dated 2802.2017, herebyassures the UK authorities that upon
   extradition to India, Mr. Chawla would be detained withinthe
   Tihar jail complex, New Delhi, India. This applies to any period
   of pre-trial detention and, inthe event of a prison sentence, upon
   conviction by a competent court.
5. Specific arrangements will be in place prior to Mr. Chawla's
   surrender to ensure hisdetention at all times (whether pre-trial
   or post-conviction) consistently with the principles set out below:
(i) (1) Jail No.1, Ward No.9; (2) Jail No.2, Werd No.5;and
   (3)Jail No.3, Ward N0.4 have been identified for lodgment of
   Mr. Chawla and photographs of the same are placed at
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                         Page 11 of 76
Annexures 'A', 'B' and 'C' respectively. The cells
   measuringapproximately 21x8x11 feet in dimensions with
   adequate personal living space. Mr. Chawla will enjoy a
   minimum of 3 sq. meter of personal space as the proposed cells
   are in line with and fully meet the minimum space
   requirementsof the CPT [Committee for Prevention of Torture
   and Inhuman or DegradingTreatment or Punishment].
Additionally, access to natural light and ventilation sanitary
   facilities, outdoor exercises, sports & recreational activities,
   security surveillance through CCTV monitoring and other
   mechanisms, medicalcare and liberty to religious practice in a
   violence free environment will also be ensured.
(ii) Mr. Chawla will be locked up for the night at the time of
   sunset (usually at dusktime) and will be allowed to carry out
   physical exercise, yoga, meditation, toattend educational /
   vocational programs and sports etc. during the day. Mr.Chawla
   will get sufficient time for his activities under proper/adequately
   guardedsecurity.
(iii) Mr. Chawla will be provided blanket and bed sheet for the
   purpose of using it as mattress and bedding. In case there is
   medical requirement, mattress andbedding will be provided to
   him as per the recommendations of the MedicalOfficer. The
   cells have provision for toilet and keeping personal belongings.
   Inaddition, each cell is having extensionof 9x8 feet covered and
   lockable area. In Delhi Prisons almost every ward has sufficient
   space/yard attached therewith,where the prisoners can have
   benefit of sunlight, fresh air and other recreationactivities.
(iv) Mr. Chawla will have sufficient access to clean drinking
   water, treated throughthe Reverse Osmosis process, each day.
   Mineral water bottles are alsoavailable through jail canteen.
   Additionally, mobile canteen are available in thewards for sale
   of eatables including biscuits, wafers, water bottles, etc.
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                         Page 12 of 76
(v) Mr. Chawla will have access to adequate toilet facilities land
   washing facilities each day: Moreover, barracks / cells also have
   toilets to cater to the need of Mr.Chawla at the time of lock-up.
(vi) Mr. Chawla will have adequate access to food throughout
   detention period. Hewill be provided with three meals per day
   namely (1) Breakfast and evening teawith snacks (2) Lunch and
   (3) Dinner. The main courses of meals havesufficient quantity
   and adequate nutritional value. The meals are daily inspected by
   the Duty Doctor as well as by the Duty Officer of the jail to
   check the quality of the food.
(vii) In relation to prison staff/guard numbers, the location of
   Mr. Chawla's cell and exercise areas are, and will remain,
   sufficiently staffed to provide appropriateand effective levels of
   security and protection for inmates. The prisoners aregenerally
   segregatedand lodged in 3 categories; (i) General Ward; (ii)
   Special SecurityWard; and (iii) High SecurityWard and round
   the clock deployment is maintained in the jail including all
   wards. The staff prisoner ratio per prison ishigh in case of High
   Security Wards i.e. around 1:6 whereas the ratio for theguards
   per prisoner for rest of wards/jail is 1:12. Additionally, 1128
   securitypersonnel are deployed to ensure safety and security of
   prisoners and to prevent unauthorized movements and escape by
   prisoners.
(viii) In relation to medical facilities, should Mr. Chawla wish,
   or because of an emergency need, to see a medic, he will have
   speedy access to the prisonmedical facilities. All inmates (both
   under trial and convict) are provided roundthe clock medical
   attention in the jails. There is a fully equipped 120 bedded
   hospital in Central Jail No.3. Further, each prison has its well
   equipped MedicalInspection Rooms. The inmates requiring
   specialist intervention & treatment arereferred to Specialty
   Hospitals. The referral hospital for Mandoli Jail Complex is
   Guru Teg Bahadur Hospital. 12 ambulances including
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                        Page 13 of 76
ambulance with Advance Life Support are available 24x7 with
   necessary medical staff and medical officerfor any emergency.
   The Hon'ble HighCourt of Delhi has appreciated themedical
   facilities available to the prisoners lodged in Delhi Prisons. The
   main features of health facilities in Delhi prisons are as follows:
• 120 bedded hospital with medical, surgical; tuberculosis and
   psychiatric wards.
• 80 bedded de-addiction centre functioning in Central Jail
   Hospital.
• De-addiction Centre (CJH): is ISO 9001-2008 certified.
   • One integrated Counseling and Testing Centre for HIV,
   functioning inCentral Jail Hospital.
   • Special diet for HIV/AIDS, Tubercular and other deserving
   inmates.
• Cases of seriously sick inmates are taken up with the
   concerned courts fortheir bail /early disposal of case.
   • DOTS centre for T.B.
   • Complete Dental Unit in Central Jail Hospital, CJ-4, CJ-6
   and Distt. Jail, Rohini.
• The prisoners suffering from various contagious diseases are
   kept separately.
• The prisoners are referred to various specialty and super
   specialty hospitals for providing required medical care and
   treatment.
• NGO's working with Tihar Prisons also contribute towards
   medical services.
• 59 Doctors including specialists and 94 paramedical staff
   presently postedfor prisons health care. 15 more doctors are
   likely to join soon.
• Round the clock casualty services in Central Jail Hospital.
   • Aminor O.T. in Central Jail Hospital.
   • Investigation facility for Biochemistry, Pathology, X-Ray,
   ECG available.
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                         Page 14 of 76
• Round the clock dispensaries in all the Jails.
   • Biomedical waste management is done as per rules of DPCC.
   • Various specialists/Senior Residents in the fields of Medicine,
   Orthopedics,Skin, Psychiatry etc. are available in Delhi Prisons
   from the side of thereferral hospital also.
   • HIV + Prevention and Management of Drug Abusers.
6. Should the UK authorities require any further specifies in
   relation to the above, in orderto consider the application for Mr.
   Chawla's extradition, we are ready to supply such details.
7. The Government of India solemnly assures the UK authorities
   that the undertakings provided above shall be provided to Mr.
   Chawla if he is extradited to India.
8. The Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, New
   Delhi, avails itself the opportunity to renew to the Home Office,
   Government of United Kingdom and the Competent Judicial
   Authorities in United Kingdom the assurances of its highest
   consideration."
and (III)


   "No.25015/56/2016-LC (Vol.II)             dated 11.06.2018

         The Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, New
   Delhi presents its compliments to the Home Office, Government
   of United Kingdom and the Competent Judicial Authorities in
   the United Kingdom.
2. The Government of the Republic of India seeks the extradition
   of Mr.Sanjeev Kumar Chawla @ Sanjeev Chawla @ Sanjay
   Chawla @ Sanjay [Mr.Chawla] from United Kingdom to face
   trial in India in Case FIR No. 111/2000 under
section 420
   (Cheating)
and
Section 120-B
(Punishment of Criminal
   Conspiracy) of
Indian Penal Code
. An appeal has been filed
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                        Page 15 of 76
before the Hon'ble High Court of Justice, London, United
   Kingdom by the Government of the Republic of India against the
   decision of District Judge (Magistrate's Court) dated 16 th
   October, 2017 to discharge Mr. Chawla in respect of an
   extradition request from the Government of India.
3. In relation to concerns on Mr. Chawla's prison conditions
   and minimum standards of detention, the Government of India
   and relevant authorities have considered the judgment of the
   Hon'ble High Court of United Kingdom dated 4th May, 2018, in
   particular paragraphs 52 and 54-55. In order to address the
   specific points of concern identified, the Government of India
   re-iterates and re-confirms the previous assurances dated
   28.02.2017 and dated 22.09.2017 in this case and now provides
   the following assurances in addition to the assurances
   previously provided:
A. General Standards:-
It is assured that the specific arrangements and treatment
   compliant with the requirements of
Article 3
of the European
   Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) will be extended to Mr.
   Chawla whose inherent dignity will be given full regard and will
   be treated accordingly. It may be further added here that
   prevailing Delhi Prison Rules shall also be applicable to Mr.
   Chawla during hisdetention.
B. Existing assurances:-
It is re-iterated and re-confirmed that in order to address
   the specificpoints of concern identified previous two assurances
   as provided in this case willstand as it is and rest of the
   assurances provided are in addition to the previousassurances.
   C. Applicability of assurances:-
It is stated that the assurances below and those contained
   In the prior assurances will apply to all periods of his
   detention/during his judicial custody in India in the said cases
   (including any pre-trial detention, detention during the trial
   phase and post-sentence in the event of conviction).
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                       Page 16 of 76
D. Personal space:-
It is assured that Mr. Chawla will be accommodated in a
   cell to be occupiedexclusively by him only with proper safety and
   security. The cell to be allotted willbe located in a Ward which is
   certainly not a High Security Ward. The ward wherehe will be
   lodged has inmates who have not violated any Prison Rules and
   are of satisfactory conduct.
Below, we guarantee Mr. Chawla will be lodged in one of
   four identifiedcells located in two different wards. The reason we
   identify morethan one cell I sto enable a degree of operational
   flexibility, should it be necessary. We make itclear that all of the
   identified cells comply with the personal space and
   hygienerequirements the court expects.
Ward 9 of Central Jail No.1

           Mr. Chawla, if extradited, would be lodged with in Cell
   No.1 or Cell No.2 of Ward No.9 in Central Jail No.1. The size of
   each cell (excluding sanitary and toilet area) is 6 square feet
   occupied by toilets/sanitary facility (Photographs of Cell No.1
   and Cell No.2 and Ward No.9 are enclosed). The sanitary
   facilities provided in the Cell No.1 & 2 duly meetthe European
   standards as per
Article 3
of ECHR and CPT norms. The Cells
   are provided with flush toilet and wash basin with adequate
   supply of water (photographs attached). As reflected in the
   photographs there is partition for the toilet area from the living
   area of the maincell for the privacy. In the bath room there is
   toilet/WC with flush facility, washbasin and a tap to meet the
   basic/daily requirement of an inmate. It may furtherbe
   mentioned that the said Ward offers sufficient space to the
   Inmates to doindoor activities like chess, carom etc. as well as
   outdoor activities like dailyphysical exercise, Badminton, Volley
   Ball etc. Further, there is green open yard infront of the Cells.
   Such facilities are available to all the inmates lodged in the same
   ward.
Ward 4 of Central Jail No.3
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                          Page 17 of 76
Besides, Cell No. 6 or Cell No.7 of Ward No. 4 in Jail
   No.3 are also earmarked for Mr. Chawla. The dimension of each
   Cell is 6 square metres i.e. same as referred in above paragraphs
   (Photographs of Cell No. 6 and Cell No. 7 of Ward No.4
   enclosed). The sanitary facilities provided in the Cell No.6 & 7
   duly meet the European standards as per
Article 3
of ECHR and
   CPT norms. The Cells are provided with flush toilet and wash
   basin with adequate supply of water (photogrphas attached). As
   reflected in the photographs, there is partition for the toilet area
   from the living area of the main cell for the privacy. In the bath
   room there is toilet/WC with flush facility, wash basin and a tap
   to meet the basic/daily requirement of an inmate. The Ward
   No.4 consists of 20 cells where the prisonershaving satisfactory
   conduct are lodged /confined. All cells are built in a row
   withopen yard in front of each cell.
Out of the available / proposed options for lodging ofMr.
   Chawla, asmentioned above Mr. Chawla would be lodged in Cell
   No.1 or Cell No. 2 of WardNo.9 at Central Jail No.1, Tihar or
   Cell No. 6 or No. 7 in Ward No.4 in Central JailNo.3.
Mr. Chawla will be provided single occupancy. It is
   assured that personalliving space in such cells fully meets with
   the minimum space requirements of theCPT where it is stated
   that each detainee will be guaranteed a minimum of 3square
   metres. The size of the cell is 6 square meters approximately
   excludingtoilet / sanitary area.
While the maximum occupancy of the each cell is of 3
   persons, Mr. Chawla if extradited, will be lodged without
   cellmates. In such circumstances, thequestion of sharing the cell
   with other prisoners does not arise. The question ofmultiple
   occupancy in the case of Mr. Chawla, therefore, does not arise.
The toilet facility is available within the cell itself.
   Further, as toilet isavailable in the cell, Mr. Chawla will have
   exclusive access to the toilet facility atall times including 'Lock-
   up times' as per his requirement. In the present matter, Mr.
   Chawla will be confined individually in a cell as single
   occupancy cell and therefore question of sharing / access to
   such toilet facilities in the cell by otherprisoners does not arise.
Other facilities:-
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                          Page 18 of 76
(a) All above mentioned cells are equipped with sink
          facility.
(b) Toilets are western style
(c) Toiletries / sanitary items would be provided to the
          inmate. Theinmate shall be able to keep himself and his
          cell neat and clean.
(d) Toilets in all cells proposed for lodging of Mr. Chawla
          are wellpartitioned to ensure complete privacy.
E. Security from violence:-
It is clarified that the identified lodgment facilities (Jail
   No.1 Ward No.9 andJail No. 3 Ward No.4) are not High
   Security Wards. Inmates having satisfactoryconduct are lodged
   in these wards. Moreover, detention in High Security Wards
   isruled out for Mr. Chawla in view of the Hon' bleUK Court's
   concerns and it isassured that Mr. Chawla will not be lodged in
   High Security Ward and in case hebecomes a security risk he
   would be shifted to Ward No. 9 of Jail No. 1 iforiginally lodged
   in Ward No. 4 of Jail No. 3 and vice-versa. A special duty
   pointwould also be deployed in addition to existing security
   arrangements of theordinary wards.
There is a high level of security provided at the entrance
   of Ward No.9 in Central Jail No.l and similarly at Ward No.4 in
   Central Jail No.3, along with sufficient number of CCTV
   cameras which are monitored 24 x 7 from the control room. It is
   assured that the Ward and adjoining area of the cell in which
   Mr. Sanjeev Chawla will be kept will definitely be covered with
   CCTV surveillance. Pan Tilt Zoom [PTZ] CCTVs are also
   installed at the prominent locations in the jails to cover
   maximum area. The ratio for the guards per prisoner is 1:12.
   One guard, shall be available 24x7 in the ward where Mr.
   Chawla will be lodged. The official so deployed in the CCTV
   control room reports immediately not only for any untoward
   incident but also for any technical issues involving in CCTV
   surveillance. There is also an Annual Maintenance Contract
   [AMC] for getting repair/make in order the CCTV which are
   reported to be out of order. It may be further mentioned here
   that the inmates are allowed to socialize only in the area
   provided within the ward and are not allowed to visit other wards
   of the jail except when prior permission is sought and granted by
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                          Page 19 of 76
the Jail Authority, Therefore, security is not an issue in such
   ward.
It is assured that the lodging of prisoners in Delhi
   Prisons/Tihar is being done with proper care, segregating first
   time offenders and repeater / habitual offenders. Delhi Prison
   ensures that the first time offenders may not mix with, the
   habitual offenders and vice versa. The, prisoner is allowed to
   meet with their relatives and friends nominated by him twice a
   week for 30 minutes each. Lawyer meetings are also permitted
   twice a week. Apart from this, the inmate is also allowed to talk
   to his family/relatives through telephone for 05 minutes daily oh
   the registered numbers. Video conferencing with trial courts is
   also available in the Tihar jails.
F. Medical care:-
There is sufficient medical, staff in the Delhi Prison. As
   on date, 86 medicalofficers, are available against 112 number of
   sanctioned posts. Medical facilitiesinclude 200 bed, hospital in
   Jail No.3 premises, Medical Inspection Room in alljails,special
   treatment facilities, Dental, X-ray etc. It is further mentioned
   thatimmediate treatment is extended to every needy inmate
   patient lodged inTihar/Delhi Prisons. In addition referral
   hospitals located outside prison areavailable for specialized and
   specialty medical requirements. Regular medicalvisits by
   specialists are also carried out to ensure effective medical
   treatment. Mr.Chawla will be provided immediatemedical
   attention if required, during his stay inDelhi Prisons. As
   necessary this will be provided within or in medical
   facilitiesoutsidethe prison to ensure appropriate and attentive
   medical treatment.
There are certain other things which are necessary to be
   mentioned as follows:-
1. An outdoor (Open to sky) yard is available to the
        inmates who maintain proper discipline asper Delhi
        Prison Rules, from morningLock-Out to 12 O'clock in
        the noon and from 1500 hrs to Lock-Up in the evening.
2. Willing Inmates are allowed to participate In Yoga
        classes, Meditation courses; higher education courses
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                        Page 20 of 76
available through Indira Gandhi National Open
           University, vocational courses etc. subject to maintaining
           good conduct inside prison.
3. There is also a Library in each jail for the use of
           inmates and they are also permitted to receive their
           reading material / books as available in the Library.
4. The inmates are also allowed to participate in various
           cultural programs organized within the jails.
5. The Inmates are also allowed to have daily newspaper
           in English or in Hindi as per their choice.
6. Selected T.V. channels are also available for the
           inmates in their Barracks/ Cells subject to maintaining
           good conduct as per Delhi Prison Rules.
4. Should the UK authorities require any further specifics in
      relation to the above. In order to consider the application for Mr.
      Chawla's extradition, we are ready to supply such details.
5. The Government of India solemnly assures the UK authorities
      that the undertakings mentioned above shall be provided to Mr.
      Chawla If he is extradited to India.
6. The Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, New
      Delhi, avails itself the opportunity to renew to the Home Office,
      Government of United Kingdom and the Competent Judicial
      Authorities in United Kingdom the assurances of its highest
      consideration."
16.     Vide order dated 14.02.2020, it was inter alia reiterated on
behalf of the petitioner that the petitioner having been extradited from
the United Kingdom in terms of the Letters of Assurances dated
28.02.2017, 22.09.2017 and 11.06.2018 of the Ministry of Home
Affairs, Government of India to face trial in India with it having been
detailed in each of the said Letters of Assurances that he would be
held at the Tihar Jail Complex, New Delhi, if extradited, the remand to
police custody is erroneous. Time was sought on behalf of the State to
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                            Page 21 of 76
submit the status report and vide order dated 14.02.2020, the petitioner
who at that time was in the custody of Inspector Gagan Bhaskar,
STARS-I, Crime Branch, Sector-8, R.K. Puram, New Delhi was
directed to be lodged at the Tihar Jail, Delhi in terms of the Letters of
Assurances of the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India
referred to hereinabove dated 28.02.2017, 22.09.2017 & 11.06.2018
till further directions of this Court.
17.    It was also considered essential that the Union of India is heard
in the matter, in as much as, the Letters of Assurances had been issued
by the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India and Court
notice was thus issued to the Standing Counsel for the Union of India
to ensure presence and representation on behalf of the Union of India
for their submissions for the date 19.02.2020 and the learned ASG for
the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, Mr. Sanjay Jain appeared thus
for the Union of India.
18.    Vide the status report submitted on 19.2.2020 on behalf of the
Government of NCT of Delhi, by Sh.Kewal Singh Ahuja, learned
APP, it has been submitted that during the investigation, it was found
that the present petitioner had played the most vital role in the
commission of the crime in as much as not only had he acted as the
main conduit between the bookies but that he also fixed matches in
connivance with the South African captain and left India on
15.3.2000, after providing a mobile phone connection bearing No.
9810294943 to the co-accused Hansie Cronje and that the statements
of Hansie Cronje and Hamid Cassim before the Kings Commission
allegedly clearly pointed to his deep rooted involvement in the case.
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                         Page 22 of 76
The extracts of the said statements of Hansie Cronje and Hamid
Cassim were submitted along with the status report which read to the
effect:
"Relevant contents of Hansie Cronje statement
            made before Kings Commission
            Page No 12 para 36
            At the beginning of February I travelled with the
            team to the Beverly Hills Intercontinental Hotel at
            Umhlanga Rocks. We were due to play the fourth
            one day International in the series, against
            Zimbabwe, in Durban on the 2nd of February.
            Hamidwas at the hotel when we arrived. He
            introduced me to a man known to me only as
            Sanjay, who he said was from London. Iwas not
            told that he was a bookmaker and thought he was
            a punter.
Para 37
            Hamid and Sanjay indicated that Sanjay wanted
            me to supply them with information but did not
            specify what information.They also said that I
            could make a lot of money if we would lose a
            match. I said that I was not prepared to do it
            unless we were assured of a place in the final of
            the triangular series. I was spinning them along as
            I do not think I had any real intention of throwing
            a match. Sanjay handed me a cell-phone box
            containing US dollars in case I changed my mind.
            Para 38
            I did not count the money, which was kept in a
            filing cabinet at home together with my prize
            money from the World Cup, the Kenya tour and
            left over sustenance allowances. It was
            subsequently counted (not by me) on 11 April when
            I confessed to receiving it, and I was told that it
            was about US $ 10,000 but may have been US $
            15,000.
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                      Page 23 of 76
Page No. 13 para 39
It is difficult to say with certainty which of the
            monies kept in the filing cabinet had come from
            Sanjay because that money was kept together with
            dollars derived from my winnings and allowances
            and advance payments I had received in respect of
            players signing on fees, deposits and travel
            allowances forwhat proved to be an abortive
            benefit tour to the sub-continent in April of this
            year.
Page 14 para 41
            It was not initially my intention to throw any
            games or to fixresults: driven by greed and
            stupidity and the lure of ease money, I thought that
            I could feed Sanjay information and keep the
            money without doing anything to influence
            matches. In fact there was no manipulation of
            games or results in South Africaand I supplied no
            information in respect of the matches in South
            Africa.
Para 42
            I realize now that the purpose of the payment was
            to "hook" mefor the Indian tour. As set out below,
            on the Indian tour in February and March 2000, I
            was increasingly pushed to manipulate results, and
            found that I had got into something from which it
            was very difficult to get out.
Page 14 para 43
            In India I was contacted by Sanjay who gave me a
            local simcard so that he could call me for
            information and which wouldalso be helpful for
            internet connectivity and e-mail. This was not
            compatible with my cell phone and could not be
            used. I later received a cell phone, sent up to my
            room, with which it was compatible.
Para 44
            I initially had no intention of involving other
            players and though that I could satisfy Sanjay by
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                       Page 24 of 76
accurately forecasting outcomes. Sanjay was not
            satisfied with this, and pressured me to speakto
            some of the other players to manipulate results. In
            thebuildup to the test, the pressure on me
            increased. I received calls on a regular basis from
            Hamid and Sanjay. Even when the cell phone was
            switched off, calls would come through to
            myrooms as late as 2 and 3' 0 clock in the
            morning. I felt increasingly trapped. I had already
            taken money from Sanjayand it became
            increasingly difficult to resist his request to
            speakto other team members and manipulate
            result.
Page 15 para 46
            I spoke to Pieter Strydom before the first test in
            India. Hisaccount of this discussion, contained in
            his written statement to the commission, is correct.
            At the time of speaking to him I was already
            racked with guilt, and his remarks about doing his
            bestfor South Africa shamed me and he in no way
            indicated that hewas interested in receiving
            money. I did not speak to any other members of the
            team. Thereafter I tried to pass of the whole
            incident with Strydom as a joke.
Para 47
            Under further pressure from Sanjay I subsequently
            made faint attempts to approach other players in
            respect of the second test. I spoke to Kallis,
            Boucher and Klusener. Their rebuffs were
            immediate, but I think they thought I was joking. I
            did not approach any other players in respect of
            the test matches andthe results in the second and
            subsequent tests were not manipulated.
            Para 48
            I then told Sanjay that perhaps I could do
            something in the firstone day international in
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                       Page 25 of 76
India, thinking that if we could get thematch out of
            the way that might satisfy them. My intention was
            not to involve other players, but merely to forecast
            which waythe match was going to go, looking at
            the pitch and condition. Sanjay was adamant,
            however, that this could not be done, so I
            suggested that I could speak to some of the other
            players, lying to him to get rid of him after the first
            match.
Page 16 para 49
            I ignored Sanjay and Hamid the night before the
            first one day atCochin but when I was phoned the
            next morning and urged togo ahead, I told them we
            could lose and that I had spoken toother players
            (which were untrue). We were supposed to losethe
            match but I couldn't go through with it I decided
            that Icouldn't try and would give it my best shot.
            As it happened wegot 301/03 and I got 19 off 20
            balls, but India won quite comfortably after
            Hayward was injured. I honestly tried to win the
            match, even at that stage, and believe we would
            have done so if Hayward was not injured.
            Page 16 para 50
            When I got back to the hotel Sanjay was upset
            because we had scored too many runs, and I
            blamed the Indian wicket keeper for three chances
            that he missed, obviously not revealing that the
            South African players concerned had not been
            involved and infact none of them knew anything
            about it. I did not receive any money for that
            match. I believe Sanjay lost money.
Para 51
            Hamid kept phoning me and saying that I should
            speak to Sanjay, who was now worse off than
            before, that he needed towin some money, and that
            I would have to deliver something.So intense had
            that incessant nagging become that I was
            presumed to fabricate a story that the players were
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                          Page 26 of 76
angry with me for not getting their money. He said
            not to worry; he would make up for it during the
            rest of the One-Day series. However, no other
            players and none of the One-Day matches
            wereinvolved, except for discussion with Gibbs
            and Williams in respect of the fifth one day
            international which I will deal within due course.
            Page 17 para 52
            During the second, third and fourth One Day
            games I was really only forecasting what I thought
            would happen, as I wanted towin the series. I
            received no money and tried my bestthroughout.
            Para 53
            The pressure on me to produce information and
            results was increasing. I was not only being
            repeatedly phoned by Hamid but also by Sanjay. I
            tried to deal with this by lying about having spoken
            to players and done things which I had not infact
            done. I cannot recall all the names that I
            mentioned and Icannot remember all the figures
            and amounts.
Para 54
            I cannot recall all the conversations, the times and
            dates, and what was said on each occasion. Also a
            great deal of what Itold Sanjay was untruthful,
            particularly about the involvement of other
            players.
Para 54.1
            Prior of the third one day international, I had,
            untruthfully told Sanjay that Boje, Strydom and
            Gibbs were involved. He therefore wanted to know
            if they would be playing in the thirdone day
            international and if further players could be
            involved. The first portion of Annexure BAW2 to
            Wilkinson-Lucks statement, if it is an accurate
            transcript, probably concerns this conversation.
            Para 54.2
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                       Page 27 of 76
A discussion with Sanjay took place the night
            before the 5th one day international during which
            we discussed Gibbs's score, atotal of 270 runs and
            William's bowling figures. If the result were as
            agreed, Sanjay was to pay $14000 in to my Nat
            West Bank Account.
Para 54.3
            Since playing for Leicestershire in 1995, I have
            had a bank account at Nat West Bank, Granby
            Street, Leicester. This was used for my foreign
            earning.
Page 18 para 55
            None of the results, including the fifth one day
            international at Nagpur on 19 March 2000 dealt
            with below, were fixed. No money changed hands
            in respect of any of the matches in India, all of
            which were a true result. That applies also to the
            fifth oneday game, despite the early agreement to
            manipulate the result.
Para 56
            By the end of the tour I was under severe pressure
            to provide some results, and my attempts to string
            Sanjay along were no longer effective. He and
            Hamid had become increasingly upset by the fact
            that I had not delivered the required results, in
            consequence of which they had been losing more
            and more money.
Para 57
            The morning of the fifth one day match at Nagpur,
            Sanjay phoned me and urged me to go ahead with
            fixing the match, and I gave in. I told him that I
            would go ahead. I was required to ensure that
            Gibbs would score less than 20 runs, that Williams
            would bowl poorly and go for more than 50
            runsduring his 10 overs, and that the total score
            should be no morethan 270 runs. I was to be paid
            for doing this. I spoke to Herschelle Gibbs and
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                      Page 28 of 76
Henry Williams, as described by them intheir
            testimony.
Page 19 para 60
            I have not spoken to Sanjay since the Indian tour
            and - apart from the money I received from him in
            Durban-received no payments from him or Hamid.
            Para 61
            After the 2000 Indian tour, whilst I was in Dubai
            for the Sharjah Cup in March of this year, I was
            again contacted by Hamid. He indicated that
            Sanjay wished to resume contact with me, along
            the same lines as in India. I had by now developed
            sufficient resolve to put it all behind me and told
            him I was not interested.I thereafter had no
            contact with Hamid after the incident described
            above until 7 April, when I telephoned him and
            told him that news of what had happened in
            relation to the One-Day games in India had
            broken.
Relevant contents of Hamid Cassim statement
            made before the Kings Commission
            Page 7 para 6.1
            On many occasions when either the Indian cricket
            players or at times the Pakistani cricket players
            who I also met visited South Africa, I would spend
            some time with the cricket players and allthe
            cricket players had my mobile number
            0825745950.
Page 9 para 7.3
            I became more friendly with Mr. Cronje in or
            about 1996 when Iwas invited to the Sharjah Cup
            which was being played in Dubai where South
            Africa were participating
            Para 7.4
            I had given Mr. Cronje my mobile number and he
            had also given me his mobile number.
Para 7.5
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                      Page 29 of 76
I would say that a lot of the South African cricket
            team had my mobile number and I also had their
            mobile numbers.
Page 11 Para 8.1
            It was during the time period that the Triangular
            Series was taking place in South Africa between
            England, South Africa and Zimbabwe that I
            received a phone call from Sanjay Chawla. Hetold
            me that he had heard from people in India that I
            had a very good relationship with many of the
            international test cricketers and that I also knew a
            lot of the South African test cricketers.
            Para 8.2
            He told me that he was coming to South Africa for
            the triangularseries and that he was a cricket
            enthusiast and that he followed test cricket world
            wide.
Para 8.3
            He told me that he would be coming to South
            Africa and wantedto meet me and if possible, get
            introduced to some of the players.
Para 8.4
            Sanjay phoned me and told me that he was coming
            to South Africa on a Sunday and asked me whether
            I could be prepared to fetch him at the airport to
            which I agreed.
Page 12 para 8.5
            He arrived on Sunday morning and I fetched him
            at the airport.
Para 8.6
            He is a young Indian male approximately between
            30 and 35 years of age, tall and thin.
Para 8.7
            I took him with me to my business premises in
            Fordsburg wherehe relaxed and had something to
            eat.
Para 8.8
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                       Page 30 of 76
In the time that he was in my company he told me
            that he had heard about me from a lot of people in
            India. He told me furtherthat he had heard that I
            had an exceptionally good relationship with a lot
            of international cricket players. He told me that he
            himself was a cricket enthusiast who followed
            cricket worldwide and he also told me that he liked
            to gamble on cricket.
Para 8.9
            In the time that I spent with him as well as the
            telephone calls that I had from him, I gathered the
            distinct impression that he was more interested in
            gambling on cricket and he was most definitely not
            what is commonly termed "a bookmaker".
Para 8.10
            He enquired where the South African players were
            staying in Durban as he was going to Durban that
            evening and I told him that they usually stayed at
            the Beverley Hills Hotel in Umhlanga Rocks. He
            asked me to accompany him to Durban in order to
            introduce him to some of the cricketers and he
            especially wanted to be introduced to the captain,
            Mr. Hansie Cronje.
Page 13 para 8.11
            I told him that I had a very good relationship with
            Mr. Cronje but was not able to go to Durban that
            evening as I had family commitments.
Para 8.12
            I took Sanjay to the airport and he left for Durban
            that evening.
Para 8.13
            He phoned me from Durban and told me that he
            was staying atthe same hotels as the South African
            cricket players.
Para 8.14
            It was eventually arranged that I would fly to
            Durban the following day and meet him at the
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                       Page 31 of 76
Beverley Hills Hotel. I flew to Durban and
            thereafter met Sanjay at the Beverley Hills Hotel.
            Sanjay told me that he in particular wanted to
            meet the captain of the South African cricket team,
            Hansie Cronje.
Para 8.15
            I phoned Hansie Cronje who was with the South
            African teamin Durban itself practicing for the one
            day international and he told me that he would be
            back at the hotel at approximately 05.30 p.m.
            Para 8.16
            Mr. Cronje then contacted me and told me that he
            was back from training and I went up to his room
            and told him that I had a friend who had come
            from London who wished to meet him.
Page 14 para 8.17
            Mr. Cronje agreed to this and came down to
            Sanjay's room where I introduced him to Sanjay.
            In Sanjay's room I had previously been watching
            provincial game of cricket which was being shown
            on the television.
Para 8.18
            Sanjay and Hansie Cronje thereafter had a
            conversation for approximately 10 minutes
            relating to cricket. They were talking, inter alia,
            about match forecasting, pitch conditions, team
            selection the conditions upon winning the toss.
            They were further discussing the number of runs in
            one day international cricket matches. I. also
            heard them discussing team selection and who
            would be batting in which order and who would be
            bowling.
Para 8.19
            I then saw Sanjay take envelope containing money
            and hand itto Mr. Cronje. Shortly thereafter Mr.
            Cronje left the room. Sanjay and Hansie then said
            that they would talk again.
Para 8.20
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                      Page 32 of 76
I thereafter told Sanjay that I would not be able to
            stay over in Durban for the one day international
            as I had other commitments. I left shortly
            thereafter for the airport and flewback to
            Johannesburg.
Para 8.21
            Sanjay also gave me his telephone numbers in
            London and told me that whenever I was in
            London I was more than welcome tobe his guest
            and he would reciprocate with hospitality. His
            telephone numbers are as follows 0944956459299
            and 09447974352755
            Page 15 para 8.22
            After the cricket series was over, Sanjay left for
            London and wekept up telephonic contact on
            occasions and he thanked me for introducing him
            to Mr. Hansie Cronje
            Para 8.23
            I thereafter received a phone call from Sanjay
            when South Africa was playing in India and he
            informed me that he was now in India where he
            had gone to watch the test series between South
            Africa and India. I recall that he told me he was
            staying at the same hotel as the South African
            players when the first one day international
            against India was being played at Cochin.
Para 8.24
            I wish to state further that save for the discussion
            at the Beverley Hills Hotels in Sanjay's room
            between himself and Mr.Cronje, I had no further
            meetings or any telephonic discussions with Mr.
            Cronje relating to what had transpired that day at
            the Beverley Hills Hotel.
Para 8.25
            I wish to state further that I at no stage went to
            India when thetest matches were being played.
            Page 16 para 8.26
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                       Page 33 of 76
I did however receive phone call from Sanjay
            asking me if Icould contact Mr. Cronje to phone
            him as he was not able to getthrough to him on his
            mobile phone. I thereafter contacted HansieCronje
            and told him that Sanjay was trying to get hold of
            him and I heard nothing further.
Para 9
            At a later stage when South Africa went to Dubai
            to play in the Sharjah Cup, friends of mine told me
            they were going to watch the game and asked me
            whether or not I could try and arrange some
            tickets for the games. I thereafter contacted Mr.
            Cronje and asked him whether or not he was in a
            position to try and arrange some tickets for the
            series."
19.   Inter alia, through the status report, it was submitted that the
petitioner having stayed at the same hotels where the South Africa
team had stayed during the tour, the calls made from the hotel Taj
Residency, Ernakulam, also showed that the petitioner was speaking
to Hamid Cassim and that the call details of the petitioner from the
United Kingdom also showed that he was in continuous touch with
Hamid Cassim.
20.   As per the said status report, it was inter alia submitted that
whilst the petitioner was in India, he had used the mobile phone No.
9811058142 purchased in the name of his brother Rajeev Chawla
which was seized from Rajeev Chawla during investigation and that
the disclosure statement made by the co-accused Krishan Kumar
indicated that the present petitioner Sanjeev Chawla was using his
mobile phone No. 9810008411 whilst at Cochin, which was allegedly
corroborated by the call details with it having been submitted that the
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                        Page 34 of 76
petitioner had refused to give his voice sample in the Letter Rogatory
and had been evading joining the investigation. The status report
dated 19.2.2020 submitted on behalf of the Government of NCT of
Delhi, states to the effect that the petitioner herein so far has not joined
the investigation and did not respond to the Letter Rogatory sent to the
United Kingdom and that he had left India pursuant to the registration
of the case and that it is for the first time that he is now before the
Investigating Agency.
21.   The said status report further states to the effect that the
petitioner was aware of the proceedings being conducted in India but
did not join the investigation and that on the grant of the police
custody remand of the petitioner vide the impugned order, the
petitioner was brought to the office of the ACP(STAR-I) Crime
Branch, R.K.Puram with the escort team around 7:30/8 p.m. and that
keeping in mind the assurances given by the Government of India, the
petitioner was not lodged in any lockup of any police station and was
kept in a room specially prepared for him and that all assurances given
by the Government of India were strictly complied with in true spirit.
The photographs of the room and conveniences provided to the
petitioner have been placed on the record with the status report dated
19.2.2020.
22.   Through the status report and submissions made by the learned
ASG, it has been submitted that neither the Investigating Agency nor
the Government of India, had given any assurances that on extradition
no further investigation in the matter could be carried out and that for
the purposes of a fair trial, the petitioner has to be confronted with the
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                            Page 35 of 76
evidence against him to unearth the whole conspiracy and to find out
all the persons involved and that in order to file a supplementary
chargesheet against the petitioner for trial and to place complete facts
before the Court, further investigation is essentially to be conducted in
terms of
Section 173(8)
of the Cr.P.C., 1973. It has been submitted
through the said status report that in terms of the law of the land
Section 173(8)
of the Cr.P.C., 1973 provides for continuing
investigation even after the filing of the police report under
Section
173(2)
of the Cr.P.C., 1973, and it has thus been reiterated on behalf
of the Government of NCT of Delhi, vide the status report, that the
police interrogation of the petitioner was very essential.
23.   The status report of Government of NCT of Delhi,                  vide
paragraph 20 states to the effect:
" 20. That as per the assurances given by the
            Govt. of India, the accused Sanjeev Kumar
            Chawla will be lodged in Tihar Jail but, for the
            purpose of investigation permission will be
            sought from the concerned court for necessary
            interrogation. If any further follow up action
            will be required, the same will be put up before
            the concerned court for suitable orders.
In view of the submissions made above, it
            is prayed that appropriate orders for
            investigation with due permission of the trial
            court may be issued. It is assured that the
            assurances given by the Govt. of India will be
            meticulously complied with.",
with it thus having been submitted that the petitioner herein in terms
of the assurances given by the Government of India shall be lodged at
the Tihar Jail but that for the purpose of investigation, permission
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                             Page 36 of 76
would be sought from the concerned Court for necessary interrogation
and that if any further follow up action was required, the prayer would
be made before the concerned Court for the suitable orders and it was
thus prayed that the appropriate orders for investigation with due
permission of the Trial Court may be granted.
24.   The learned Additional Solicitor General, for the Hon'ble
Supreme Court of India, Mr.Sanjay Jain, at the outset has categorically
stated to the effect that the Government of India shall adhere to the
Letter of Assurances given by the Ministry of Home Affairs dated
28.2.2017, 22.9.2017 and 11.6.2018 in letter and spirit and that the
petitioner shall be held at the Tihar Jail Complex only and shall be
lodged therein in accordance with the said Letters of Assurances.
25.   It was however been submitted on behalf of the Union of India
that the assurances given vide the Letters of Assurance dated
28.2.2017 and 22.9.2017 were reiterated and reconfirmed vide the
Letters of Assurance provided in addition to the previous assurances
and vide Clause 'C' of the Letter of Assurance dated 11.06.2018, it
was stipulated to the effect:
"C. Applicability of assurances:
It is stated that the assurances below
                and those contained in the prior assurances
                will apply to all periods             of his
                detention/during his judicial custody in
                India in the said cases (including any pre-
                trial detention, detention during the trial
                phase and post-sentence in the event of
                conviction)."
(emphasis supplied)
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                        Page 37 of 76
and that thus, the petitioner herein had to continue to remain lodged at
the Tihar Jail Complex in conformity with the terms of the Letters of
Assurance issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs for any pre-trial
detention during the trial faced and post-sentence in the event of the
conviction. It was further submitted on behalf of the Union of India
that the final report under
Section 173
of the Cr.P.C., 1973, dated
22.7.2013 had clearly spelt out that the present petitioner arrayed as
accused No.4 as per column 11 (xv) was shown to have been not
arrested and vide clause 11 (xxi) was shown to be absconding. It was
further submitted that the said charges vide paragraph 32 thereof had
categorically spelt out 'that the evidence that had been collected
from the investigation conducted so far' had brought forth the
complicity of the petitioner herein with Hansie Cronje, Krishan
Kumar, Rajesh Kalra,Sunil Dara @ Bittoo and Manmohan Khattar for
fixing the cricket matches played between India and South Africa
from 16.2.2000 to 20.3.2000. Paragraph 32 of the charge sheet reads
to the effect:
"That from the investigation conducted so
                 far, there is sufficient evidence to prove
                 that the accused persons namely Sanjeev
                 Chawla, Hansie Cronje, Krishan Kumar,
                 Rajesh Kalra, Sunil Dara @ Bittoo and
                 Manmohan Khatter mentioned in Column
                 No 11 of the chargesheet had entered into
                 a criminal conspiracy to fix the cricket
                 matches played between India and South
                 Africa from 16.02.2000 to 20.03.2000 in
                 India. In furtherance of this conspiracy,
                 the 1st Test Match at Mumbai and the 1st
                 One Day International at Cochin were
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                        Page 38 of 76
fixed and the same resulted in wrongful
               gain to the accused and wrongful loss in
               general to the public at large, who had
               gone believing that they would witness
               truly competitive matches in which each
               player would perform optimally. The
               accused persons have thus committed
               offences punishable
u/s 420
/
120B
of IPC."
(emphasis supplied)
26.   It was further submitted on behalf of the Union of India that
vide paragraph 33 of the charge sheet it had been further specified to
the effect that the petitioner herein arrayed as the accused at Serial
No.4 and the accused at Serial No. 5 Manmohan Khattar were
absconding.
27.   It was further submitted on behalf of the Union of India that in
the statements that have been made in the learned Westminster
Magistrates' Court in the request made by India for the extradition of
the petitioner herein through its Judicial Authority in order to
prosecute the petitioner for his role in the fixing of cricket matches
played between India and South Africa during the tour of the South
African cricket team to India under the captainship of Hansie Cronje
from February to March, 2000 for the Requested Person to be given, it
was submitted that the observations in paragraph 15 of the said verdict
of the Westminster Magistrates' Court dated 16.10.2017 were
categorical to indicate that the Union of India had submitted that the
petitioner herein, i.e., the Requested Person was not engaged with the
Indian Authorities and was thus a fugitive and that a warrant had been
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                        Page 39 of 76
issued and that the aspect of the grant of the prayer of extradition had
essentially to be considered on a case to case basis.
28.       The observations in paragraph 15 of the verdict dated
16.10.2017 of the learned District Judge MC of the Westminster
Magistrates' Court are to the effect
                "The JA submits that the RP is a fugitive and
                cannot rely on the passage of time. In the case of
                Wisniewski & Others v. Poland [2016] EWHC 386
                (Admin), at para 59, the court said that ' where a
                person has knowingly placed himself beyond the
                reach of a legal process he cannot invoke the
                passage of time resulting from such conduct on his
                part to support the existence of a statutory bar to
                extradition. Rather than seeking to provide a
                comprehensive definition of a fugitive for this
                purpose, it is likely to be more fruitful to consider
                the applicability of this principle on a case by case
                basis.' The JA submits that the RP knew of the
                ongoing investigation and that a warrant had
                been issued and has not engaged with the Indian
                authorities so is a fugitive."
(emphasis supplied)
29.       Further reliance was placed on behalf of the Union of India on
the extradition treaty dated 22.09.1992 and the instruments of
ratification exchanged at New Delhi on 15.11.1993 between the
Government of the Republic of India and the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland as published
in the Gazette of India (Extraordinary) dated 30.12.1993 submitting to
the effect that the vide
Articles 11
& 13
thereof it was provided to the
effect:
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                         Page 40 of 76
"
ARTICLE 11 :
Extradition Procedures

            (1) Subject to the provisions of
Article 22
of
                this Treaty, the request for extradition shall
                be made through the diplomatic channel.
            (2) The request shall be accompanied by:
(a) as accurate a description as possible of
                the person sought, together with any other
                information which would help to establish
                his identity, nationality and residence;
(b) a statement of the facts of the offence
                for which extradition is requested, and
(c) the text, if any, of the law:
(i) defining that offence ; and
(ii) prescribing      the    maximum
                        punishment for that offence.
(3) If the request relates to an accused person,
                it must also be accompanied by a warrant
                of arrest issued by a judge, magistrate or
                other competent authority in the territory of
                the Requesting State and by such evidence
                as, according to the law of the Requested
                State, would justify his committal for trial if
                the offence had been committed in the
                territory of the Requested State, including
                evidence that the person requested is the
                person to whom the warrant of arrest
                refers.
(4) If the request relates to a person already
                convicted and sentenced, it shall also be
                accompanied:
(a) by a certificate of the
                      conviction and sentence;
(b) by a statement that the
                      person is not entitled to question
                      the conviction or sentence and
                      showing how much of the
                      sentence has not been carried
                      out.
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                           Page 41 of 76
(5) In relation to a convicted person who was
               not present at his trial, the person shall be
               treated for the purposes of paragraph (4) of
               this Article as if he had been accused of the
               offence of which he was convicted.
(6) If the Requested State considers that the
               evidence produced or information supplied
               for the purposes of this Treaty is not
               sufficient in order to enable a decision to be
               taken as to the request, additional evidence
               or information shall be submitted within
               such time as the Requested State shall
               require.
ARTICLE 13:
Rule of Speciality
            (1) Any person who is returned to the territory
               of the Requesting State under this Treaty
               shall not, during the period described in
               paragraph (2) of this Article, be dealt with
               in the territory of the Requesting State for
               or in respect of any offence committed
               before he was returned to that territory
               other than:
(a)     the offence in respect of which he
                   was returned;
                   (b)     any lesser offence disclosed by
                   the facts proved for the purposes of
securing his return other than an offence
                   in relation to which an order for his
                   return could not lawfully be made; or
(c)     any other offence in respect of
                   which the Requested Party may consent
                   to his being dealt with other than an
                   offence in relation to which an order for
                   his return could not lawfully be made or
                   would not in fact be made.
(2) The period referred to in paragraph (1) of
               this Article is the period beginning with the
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                         Page 42 of 76
day of his arrival in the territory of the
               Requesting State or his return under this
               Treaty and ending forty-five days after the
               first subsequent day on which he has the
               opportunity to leave the territory of the
               Requesting State.
(3) The provisions of paragraph (1) of this
               Article shall not apply to offences
               committed after the return of a person
               under this Treaty or matters arising in
               relation to such offences.
(4) A person shall not be re-extradited to a
               third State, except when, having had an
               opportunity to leave the territory of the
               State to which he has been surrendered, he
               has not done so within sixty days to his final
               discharge, or has returned to that territory
               after having left it."
30.   It was thus submitted on behalf of the Union of India that the
Rules of Specialty in
Article 13
of the Extradition Treaty provided for
the Requesting State to deal with the Requested Person returned to
the territory of the Requesting State under the Treaty in respect of
any offence committed before the Requested Person was returned to
the Requesting State specifying therein that the Requested Person
would not be dealt with by the Requesting State in respect of any
offence for which he was not returned to the Requesting State nor for
any graver offence other than that for which he was extradited nor for
any other offence for which he had been extradited except with the
consent of the requesting State. It was further submitted that the
extradition made by any person pursuant to the Extradition Treaty has
to be in terms of
Article 13
i.e., the Rule of Speciality which however
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                         Page 43 of 76
is essentially to be governed by the law of the Requesting State and
that thus in as much as in terms of
Section 173(8)
of the Cr.P.C., 1973,
the Requesting State i.e., India and its Investigating Agency could
not be precluded from conducting any further investigation qua the
petitioner who has not even been interrogated by the Investigating
Agency in as much as he was absconding.
31.    Reliance was thus placed on behalf of the Union of India on the
provisions of
Section 21
of the Extradition Act, 1962 which read to
the effect:
"21. Accused or convicted person surrendered
              or returned by foreign State not to be tried for
              certain offences. Whenever any person accused
              or convicted of an offence, which, if committed
              in India would be an extradition offence, is
              surrendered or returned by a foreign State, such
              person shall not, until he has been restored or
              has had an opportunity of returning to that
              State, be tried in India for an offence other than-
-
(a) the extradition offence in relation to which
              he was surrendered or returned; or
(b) any lesser offence disclosed by the facts
              proved for the purposes of securing his
              surrender or return other than an offence in
              relation to which an order for his surrender or
              return could not be lawfully made; or
(c) the offence in respect of which the foreign
              State has given its consent.",

to submit that the said provisions relate to both an accused or a
convicted person and thus in relation to the petitioner herein who is
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                           Page 44 of 76
accused of the alleged commission of the offence punishable under
Section 420 read with
Section 120B
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, it
was sought to be submitted on behalf of the Union of India that the
Investigating Agency could thus not be precluded from conducting
further investigation which is its right in terms of
Section 173(8)
of the
Cr.P.C., 1973.
32.    Reliance was thus placed on behalf of the Union of India on the
verdict of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
CBI vs. Rathin Dandapat
and Ors.
with
CBI Vs. Chandi Karan
with
CBI Vs. Anuj Pandey
2016) 1 SCC 507, a verdict dated 21.08.2015 to submit to the effect
that after cognizance is taken of an offence, the police has power to
investigate into it further which can be exercised only in accordance
with Chapter XII of the
Cr.PC
, 1973 and that further, in terms of
Section 309(2)
of the Cr.PC, 1973 which empowers remand of an
accused who was before the Court when cognizance was taken or
when inquiry or trial was being held, he can be remanded only to
judicial custody. Reliance was thus placed on observations in paras 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 & 14 of the said verdict, which read to the effect:
"7. Before further discussion, we think it just and proper to
      quote the relevantprovisions of law.
8. Proviso to Sub-section (2) of
Section 167
Code of
      Criminal Procedure, which empowers a Magistrate to
      authorize detention of an accused in the custody of police,
      reads as under:
"Provided that-
(a) The Magistrate may authorize the detention of the
        accusedperson, otherwise than in the custody of the
        police, beyond theperiod of fifteen days, if he is satisfied
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                          Page 45 of 76
that adequate grounds exist for doing so, but no
       Magistrate shall authorize the detention of the accused
       person in custody under this paragraph for a total
       periodexceeding-
(i) Ninety days, where the investigation relates to an
         offencepunishable with death, imprisonment for life
         orimprisonment for a term of not less than ten years;
(ii) Sixty days, where the investigation relates to any
         otheroffence, and, on the expiry of the said period of
         ninety days,or sixty days, as the case may be, the
         accused person shallbe released on bail if he is
         prepared to and does furnishbail, and every person
         released on bail under this Subsectionshall be deemed
         to be so released under theprovisions of Chapter
         XXXIII for the purposes of thatChapter;
(b) No Magistrate shall authorize detention of the
            accused in custodyof the police under this section
            unless the accused is produced before him in person
            for the first time and subsequently every timetill the
            accused remains in the custody of the police, but
            theMagistrate may extend further detention in
            judicial custody on production of the accused either
            in person or through the medium of electronic video
            linkage;
(c) No Magistrate of the second class, not specially
            empowered inthis behalf by the High Court, shall
            authorize detention in thecustody of the police.
9. Sub-section (8) of Section 173, under which investigating
     agency has power tofurther investigate the matter in which
     the report/charge sheet has already been filed,is
     reproduced hereunder:
(8) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude
         further investigationin respect of an offence after a
         report Under Sub-section (2) has beenforwarded to the
         Magistrate and, where upon such investigation, the
         officerin charge of the police station obtains further
         evidence, oral or documentary,he shall forward to the
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                        Page 46 of 76
Magistrate a further report or reports regarding
        suchevidence in the form prescribed; and the provisions
        of Sub-sections (2) to(6) shall, as far as may be, apply
        in relation to such report or reports as theyapply in
        relation to a report forwarded Under Sub-section (2).
10. Relevant provision of Sub-section (2) of
Section 309
Code of Criminal Procedure,empowering remand of an
     accused, provides as under:
(2) If the Court after taking cognizance of an offence, or
         commencement oftrial, finds it necessary or advisable
         to postpone the commencement of, oradjourn, any
         inquiry or trial, it may, from time to time, for reasons to
         berecorded, postpone or adjourn the same on such
         terms as it thinks fit, forsuch time as it considers
         reasonable, and may by a warrant remand theaccused if
         in custody:
Explanation 1.-If sufficient evidence has been
             obtained to raise asuspicion that the accused may
             have committed an offence, and itappears likely that
             further evidence may be obtained by a remand,this
             is a reasonable cause for a remand.
11. In State through CBI v. Dawood Ibrahim Kaskar and
     Ors. MANU/SC/0643/1997 : (2000) 10 SCC 438, a three
     judge bench of this Court has laid down the law on the
     issue relating to grant of police custody of a person
     arrested during further investigation. In paragraph 11 of
     said case, this Court has held as follows:
11. There cannot be any manner of doubt that the
         remand and the custody referred to in the first proviso
         to the above Sub-section are different from detention in
         custody Under Section 167. While remand under the
         former relates to a stage after cognizance and can only
         be to judicial custody, detention under the latter relates
         to the stage of investigation and caninitially be either in
         police custody or judicial custody. Since, however, even
         after cognizance is taken of an offence the police has a
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                          Page 47 of 76
power to investigate into it further, which can be
        exercised only in accordance with Chapter XII, we see
        no reason whatsoever why the provisions of Section 167
        thereof would not apply to a person who comes to be
        later arrested by the police in course of such
        investigation. If Section 309(2) is to be interpreted--as
        has been interpreted by the Bombay High Court in
        Mohd. Ahmed Yasin Mansuri v. State of Maharashtra
        MANU/MH/0130/1994 : 1994 Cri. L J 1854 (Bom),-
tomean that after the Court takes cognizance of an
        offence it cannot exerciseits power of detention in
        police custody Under Section 167 of the Code,
        theInvestigating Agency would be deprived of an
        opportunity to interrogate aperson arrested during
        further investigation, even if it can on production
        ofsufficient materials, convince the Court that his
        detention in its (police)custody was essential for that
        purpose. We are, therefore, of the opinion thatthe words
        "accused if in custody" appearing in Section 309(2)
        refer andrelate to an accused who was before the Court
        when cognizance was taken orwhen enquiry or trial was
        being held in respect of him and not to an accusedwho
        is subsequently arrested in course of further
        investigation. So far as theaccused in the first category
        is concerned he can be remanded to judicialcustody
        only in view of Section 309(2), but he who comes under
        the secondcategory will be governed by Section 167 so
        long as further investigationcontinues. That necessarily
        means that in respect of the latter the Courtwhich had
        taken cognizance of the offence may exercise its power
        to detainhim in police custody, subject to the
        fulfilment of the requirements and thelimitation of
        Section 167.
(emphasis supplied)
12. The case of
Dinesh Dalmia v. CBI
     MANU/SC/7924/2007
: (2007) 8 CC 770,which is relied
     upon by the High Court, relates to granting of bail Under
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                       Page 48 of 76
Section167(2)
Code of Criminal Procedure. In said case,
     the accused/absconder (DineshDalmia) after his arrest
     was produced before the Magistrate, and on the request
     ofCBI police custody was granted on 14.2.2006 till
     24.2.2006, whereafter on another application further
     police custody was granted till 8.3.2006. Said accused was
     remanded to judicial custody, and the accused sought
     statutory bail Under Sub-section (2) of
Section 167
Code
     of Criminal Procedure as no charge sheet was filedagainst
     him by CBI within sixty days of his arrest. The Magistrate
     rejected theapplication for statutory bail on the ground
     that it was a case of further investigationafter filing of the
     charge sheet, and the remand of the accused to judicial
     custodywas Under
Section 309
Code of Criminal
     Procedure, after police remand came to anend, granted
     Under
Section 167(2)
Code of Criminal Procedure. The
     High Courtupheld said order and this Court also affirmed
     the view taken by the High Court.
13.
In view of the above facts, in the present case, in our
     opinion, the High Court isnot justified on the basis of
Dinesh Dalmia
(supra) in upholding refusal of remandin
     police custody by the Magistrate, on the ground that
     accused stood in custody afterhis arrest Under
Section 309
Code of Criminal Procedure. We have already notedabove
     the principle of law
laid down by
the three judge bench of
     this Court in Statev.
Dawood Ibrahim Kaskar (supra) that
     police remand can be sought UnderSection 167(2)
Code of
     Criminal Procedure
in respect of an accused arrested at
     thestage of further investigation, if the interrogation is
     needed by the investigatingagency. This Court has further
     clarified in said case that expression 'accused if incustody
     in
Section 309(2)
Code of Criminal Procedure does not
     include the accusedwho is arrested on further investigation
     before supplementary charge sheet is filed.
14. For the reasons, as discussed above, we find that the
     refusal of police remand inthe present case is against the
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                          Page 49 of 76
settled principle of law laid down by this Court.Therefore,
      the impugned orders passed by the High Court, affirming
      the orders of theAdditional Chief Judicial Magistrate,
      Jhargram, are liable to be set aside. Accordingly,the
      impugned orders passed by the High Court and the orders
      passed by theMagistrate, declining the police remand, are
      set aside. The Magistrate is directed topass fresh orders on
      the applications made by the Appellant before it relating
      togranting of police remand of the Respondents in
      accordance with law."
33.    It was further submitted on behalf of the Union of India that the
petitioner falls within the category of a 'fugitive criminal' as defined
in terms of
Section 2(f)
of the Extradition Act, 1962,which provides as
follows:
"(f) "fugitive criminal"means a person who is accused or
      convicted of an extradition offence within the jurisdiction of
      a foreign State and includes a person who, while in India,
      conspires, attempts to commit or incites or participates as
      an accomplice in the commission of an extradition offence
      in a foreign State."
and that thus the trial for which the petitioner has been extradited to
India in relation to the FIR No.111/2000, PS Chanakyapuri qua the
alleged commission of the offence punishable under
Sections 420
/
120
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 has essentially to be conducted in
accordance with law which would thus thereby not preclude the
Investigating Agency from invocation of the powers of investigation
in terms of
Section 173 (8)
of the Cr.PC, 1973.
34.    The verdict of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Vinubhai
Haribhai Malaviya and Ors. vs. State of Gujarat and Anr.
2019 SCC
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                          Page 50 of 76
OnLine SC 1346, a verdict dated 16.10.2019 stipulates vide paras 22,
30, 31, 32, 33, 35 thereof, which read to the effect:
"22. With the introduction of Section 173(8) in the
Code of
     Criminal Procedure
, the police department has been
     armed with the power to further investigate an offence
     even after a police report has been forwarded to the
     Magistrate. Quite obviously, this power continues until the
     trial can be said to commence in a criminal case. The
     vexed question before us is as to whether the Magistrate
     can order further investigation after a police report has
     been forwarded to him Under Section 173.
     ...
...
30. Whereas it is true that Section 156(3) remains
     unchanged even after the 1973 Code has been brought into
     force, yet the 1973 Code has one very important addition,
     namely, Section 173(8), which did not exist under the 1898
     Code. As we have noticed earlier in this judgment,
Section
     2(h)
of the 1973
Code of Criminal Procedure
defines
     "investigation" in the same terms as the earlier definition
     contained in
Section 2(l)
of the 1898
Code of Criminal
     Procedure
with this difference-that "investigation" after
     the 1973 Code has come into force will now include all the
     proceedings under the
Code of Criminal Procedure
for
     collection of evidence conducted by a police officer. "All"
would clearly include proceedings Under Section 173(8)
     as well. Thus, when Section 156(3) states that a Magistrate
     empowered Under Section 190 may order "such an
     investigation", such Magistrate may also order further
     investigation Under Section 173(8), regard being had to
     the definition of "investigation" contained in
Section 2(h)
.
31.
Section 2(h)
is not noticed by the aforesaid judgment at
     all, resulting in the erroneous finding in law that the
     power Under Section 156(3) can only be exercised at the
     pre-cognizance stage. The "investigation" spoken of in
     Section 156(3) would embrace the entire process, which
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                        Page 51 of 76
begins with the collection of evidence and continues until
     charges are framed by the Court, at which stage the trial
     can be said to have begun. For these reasons, the
     statement of the law contained in paragraph 17 in
     Devarapalli Lakshminarayana Reddy (supra) cannot be
     relied upon.
32. Ram Lal Narang v. State (Delhi Administration)
     MANU/SC/0216/1979 : (1979) 2 SCC 322, is an early
     judgment which deals with the power contained in Section
     173(8) after a charge-sheet is filed. This Court adverted to
     the Law Commission Report and to a number of judgments
     which recognised the right of the police to make repeated
     investigations under the
Code of Criminal Procedure
,
     1898. It then quoted the early Supreme Court judgment in
     H.N. Rishbud v. State of Delhi MANU/SC/0049/1954 : AIR
     1955 SC 196 case as follows:
17. In H.N. Rishbud v. State of Delhi
       [MANU/SC/0049/1954 : AIR 1955 SC 196 : (1955) 1
       SCR 1150 : 1955 Cri. L J 526] this Court contemplated
       the possibility of further investigation even after a Court
       had taken cognizance of the case. While noticing that a
       police report resulting from an investigation was
       provided in
Section 190
Code of Criminal Procedure as
       the material on which cognizance was taken, it was
       pointed out that it could not be maintained that a valid
       and legal police report was the foundation of the
       jurisdiction of the court to take cognizance. It was held
       that where cognizance of the case had, in fact, been
       taken and the case had proceeded to termination, the
       invalidity of the precedent investigation did not vitiate
       the result unless miscarriage of justice had been caused
       thereby. It was said that a defect or illegality in
       investigation, however serious, had no direct bearing on
       the competence of the procedure relating to cognizance
       or trial. However, it was observed:
It does not follow that the invalidity of the
           investigation is to be completely ignored by a Court
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                         Page 52 of 76
during trial. When the breach of such mandatory
           provision is brought to the knowledge of the Court at
           a sufficiently early stage, the Court, while not
           declining cognizance, will have to take the necessary
           steps to get the illegality cured and the defect
           rectified, by ordering such re-investigation as the
           circumstances of an individual case may call
           for.This decision is a clear authority for the view
           that further investigation is not altogether ruled out
           merely because cognizance of the case has been
           taken by the court; defective investigation coming to
           light during the course of a trial may be cured by a
           further investigation, if circumstances permit it.
33. The Court then went on to hold:
20. Anyone acquainted with the day-to-day working of
       the criminal courts will be alive to the practical
       necessity of the police possessing the power to make
       further investigation and submit a supplemental report.
It is in the interests of both the prosecution and the
       defence that the police should have such power. It is
       easy to visualise a case where fresh material may come
       to light which would implicate persons not previously
       Accused or absolve persons already Accused. When it
       comes to the notice of the investigating agency that a
       person already Accused of an offence has a good alibi,
       is it not the duty of that agency to investigate the
       genuineness of the plea of alibi and submit a report to
       the Magistrate? After all the investigating agency has
       greater resources at its command than a private
       individual. Similarly, where the involvement of persons
       who are not already Accused comes to the notice of the
       investigating agency, the investigating agency cannot
       keep quiet and refuse to investigate the fresh
       information. It is their duty to investigate and submit a
       report to the Magistrate upon the involvement of the
       other persons. In either case, it is for the Magistrate to
       decide upon his future course of action depending upon
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                        Page 53 of 76
the stage at which the case is before him. If he has
       already taken cognizance of the offence, but has not
       proceeded with the enquiry or trial, he may direct the
       issue of process to persons freshly discovered to be
       involved and deal with all the Accused in a single
       enquiry or trial. If the case of which he has previously
       taken cognizance has already proceeded to some extent,
       he may take fresh cognizance of the offence disclosed
       against the newly involved Accused and proceed with
       the case as a separate case. What action a Magistrate is
       to take in accordance with the provisions of the
Code of
       Criminal Procedure
in such situations is a matter best
       left to the discretion of the Magistrate. The criticism
       that a further investigation by the police would trench
       upon the proceeding before the court is really not of
       very great substance, since whatever the police may do,
       the final discretion in regard to further action is with
       the Magistrate. That the final word is with the
       Magistrate is sufficient safeguard against any excessive
       use or abuse of the power of the police to make further
       investigation. We should not, however, be understood to
       say that the police should ignore the pendency of a
       proceeding before a court and investigate every fresh
       fact that comes to light as if no cognizance had been
       taken by the Court of any offence. We think that in the
       interests of the independence of the magistracy and the
       judiciary, in the interests of the purity of the
       administration of criminal justice and in the interests of
       the comity of the various agencies and institutions
       entrusted with different stages of such administration, it
       would ordinarily be desirable that the police should
       inform the court and seek formal permission to make
       further investigation when fresh facts come to light.
21. As observed by us earlier, there was no provision in
       the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1898 which, expressly
       or by necessary implication, barred the right of the
       police to further investigate after cognizance of the case
       had been taken by the Magistrate. Neither Section 173
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                       Page 54 of 76
nor Section 190 lead us to hold that the power of the
       police to further investigate was exhausted by the
       Magistrate taking cognizance of the offence. Practice,
       convenience and preponderance of authority, permitted
       repeated investigations on discovery of fresh facts. In
       our view, notwithstanding that a Magistrate had taken
       cognizance of the offence upon a police report
       submitted Under Section 173 of the 1898 Code, the
       right of the police to further investigate was not
       exhausted and the police could exercise such right as
       often as necessary when fresh information came to
       light. Where the police desired to make a further
       investigation, the police could express their regard and
       respect for the court by seeking its formal permission to
       make further investigation.
(emphasis supplied)
      ...
...
35. Hasanbhai Valibhai Qureshi v. State of Gujarat and Ors.
     MANU/SC/0302/2004;         (2004) 5 SCC 347 is an important
     judgment which deals with the necessity for further investigation
     being balanced with the delaying of a criminal proceeding. If
     there is a necessity for further investigation when fresh facts
     come to light, then the interest of justice is paramount and
     trumps the need to avoid any delay being caused to the
     proceeding. The Court therefore held:
11. Coming to the question whether a further
          investigation is warranted, the hands of the
          investigating agency or the court should not be tied
          down on the ground that further investigation may
          delay the trial, as the ultimate object is to arrive at the
          truth.
12. Sub-section (8) of Section 173 of the Code permits
          further investigation, and even dehors any direction
          from the court as such, it is open to the police to
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                           Page 55 of 76
conduct proper investigation, even after the court took
        cognizance of any offence on the strength of a police
        report earlier submitted. All the more so, if as in this
        case, the Head of the Police Department also was not
        satisfied of the propriety or the manner and nature of
        investigation already conducted.
(emphasis supplied)
13.
In
Ram Lal Narang v. State (Delhi Admn
.)
        [MANU/SC/0216/1979 : (1979) 2 SCC 322 : 1979 SCC
        (Cri.) 479 : AIR 1979 SC 1791] it was observed by this
        Court that further investigation is not altogether ruled
        out merely because cognisance has been taken by the
        court. When defective investigation comes to light
        during course of trial, it may be cured by further
        investigation, if circumstances so permitted. It would
        ordinarily be desirable and all the more so in this case,
        that the police should inform the court and seek formal
        permission to make further investigation when fresh
        facts come to light instead of being silent over the
        matter keeping in view only the need for an early trial
        since an effective trial for real or actual offences found
        during course of proper investigation is as much
        relevant, desirable and necessary as an expeditious
        disposal of the matter by the courts. In view of the
        aforesaid position in law, if there is necessity for further
        investigation, the same can certainly be done as
        prescribed by law. The mere fact that there may be
        further delay in concluding the trial should not stand in
        the way of further investigation if that would help the
        court in arriving at the truth and do real and
        substantial as well as effective justice. We make it clear
        that we have not expressed any final opinion on the
        merits of the case."
thus making it apparent that Sub-section (8) of
Section 173
of the
Cr.PC, 1973 permits further investigation by the Investigating Agency
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                          Page 56 of 76
even de hors any direction from the Court as it is open to the police to
conduct proper investigation even after the Court takes cognizance of
any offence on the strength of the police report earlier submitted and
that it would ordinarily be desirable that the police should inform the
Court and seek formal permission to make further investigation when
fresh facts come to light. Furthermore, as
laid down in
Vinubhai
Haribhai Malaviya and Ors.
(supra), the Magistrate is not denuded of
the power to order further investigation at the post-cognizance stage.
35.    On behalf of the petitioner it was contended that the provisions
of
Section 173(8)
of the Cr.PC, 1973 cannot be brought into play in
the instant case to grant the prayer made by the Union of India and the
Government of NCT of Delhi to conduct any interrogation of the
petitioner as sought to be made even within the premises of the Tihar
Jail, Delhi in terms of the Letters of Assurances dated 28.02.2017,
22.09.2017 and 11.06.2018,in as much as the petitioner herein was not
extradited for the purpose of investigation and was extradited only to
face trial.
36.    Undoubtedly, trial commences only after the framing of charges
as
laid down by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Hardeep Singh vs.
State of Punjab and Ors.
(2014) 3 SCC 92 as observed vide paras 27,
28, 29, 35, 36 and 47 of the said verdict, which read to the effect:
"27. The stage of inquiry commences, insofar as the court
      is concerned, with the filing of the charge-sheet and the
      consideration of the material collected by the prosecution,
      that is mentioned in the charge-sheet for the purpose of
      trying the accused. This has to be understood in terms of
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                          Page 57 of 76
Section 2(g)
Code of Criminal Procedure, which defines an
     inquiry as follows:
2(g) "inquiry" means every inquiry, other than a trial,
       conducted under this Code by a Magistrate or Court."
28. In State of U.P. v. Lakshmi Brahman and Anr.
     MANU/SC/0169/1983: AIR 1983 SC 439, this Court held
     that from the stage of filing of charge-sheet to ensuring the
     compliance of provision of
Section 207
Code of Criminal
     Procedure, the court is only at the stage of inquiry and no
     trial can be said to have commenced. The above view has
     been held to be per incurium in Raj Kishore Prasad v. State
     of Bihar and Anr. MANU/SC/0480/1996 : AIR 1996 SC
     1931, wherein this Court while observing that
Section
     319(1)
Code of Criminal Procedure operates in an ongoing
     inquiry into, or trial of, an offence, held that at the stage of
Section 209
Code of Criminal Procedure, the court is
     neither at the stage of inquiry nor at the stage of trial. Even
     at the stage of ensuring compliance of
Sections 207
and
208
Code of Criminal Procedure, it cannot be said that the
     court is at the stage of inquiry because there is no judicial
     application of mind and all that the Magistrate is required
     to do is to make the case ready to be heard by the Court of
     Sessions.
29. Trial is distinct from an inquiry and must necessarily
     succeed it. The purpose of the trial is to fasten the
     responsibility upon a person on the basis of facts presented
     and evidence led in this behalf. In Moly and Anr. v. State of
     Kerala MANU/SC/0259/2004 : AIR 2004 SC 1890, this
     Court observed that though the word 'trial' is not defined in
     the Code, it is clearly distinguishable from inquiry. Inquiry
     must always be a forerunner to the trial.
...
...
35. In Raj Kishore Prasad (Supra), this Court said that as
     soon as the prosecutor is present before the court and that
     court hears the parties on framing of charges and
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                           Page 58 of 76
discharge, trial is said to have commenced and that there
     is no intermediate stage between committal of case and
     framing of charge.
36. In In Re: Narayanaswamy Naidu v. Unknown
     MANU/TN/0256/1909 : 1 Ind. Cas 228, a Full Bench of
     the Madras High Court held that "Trial begins when the
     accused is charged and called on to answer and then the
     question before the Court is whether the accused is to be
     acquitted or convicted and not whether the complaint is to
     be dismissed or the accused discharged.
...
...
47. Since after the filing of the charge-sheet, the court
     reaches the stage of inquiry and as soon as the court
     frames the charges, the trial commences, and therefore,
     the power under
Section 319(1)
Code of Criminal
     Procedure can be exercised at any time after the charge-
     sheet is filed and before the pronouncement of judgment,
     except during the stage of
Section 207
/
208
Code of
     Criminal Procedure, committal etc., which is only a pre-
     trial stage, intended to put the process into motion."
(emphasis supplied)
In this context, it is essential to observe that as laid down by the
Hon'ble High Court of Calcutta in
Pawan Kumar Ruia Vs. The State
of West Bengal and Ors.
1998 (2) CLJ 310, the pre-trial stage
includes the stage of filing of the FIR and the stage of investigation
as observed vide para 26 of the said verdict, which read to the effect:
"26. Sri Balai Ch. Roy, appearing on behalf of the
     petitioner on the other hand submitted that the direction as
     contained in the order of the Supreme Court is not only to
     raise all legal and factual pleas available but to raise the
     same at any appropriate stage and in particular at the pre-
     trial stage. Pre-trial stage means the stage before framing
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                         Page 59 of 76
of charge and includes the initial stage of lodging of
     F.I.R. or filing complaint and an accused can very well
     raise the question of quashing the said complaint of
     F.I.R. at its initial stage i.e., immediately after it is lodged
     or instituted. An accused may come before the High Court
     for its quashing or for quashing the investigation if it had
     begun during the pre-trial stage. According to Sri Balai
     Ch. Roy at any appropriate stage means at any stage of
     investigation or proceeding which the accused considers
     appropriate from the time of institution of the F.I.R. or
     lodging of the complaint to any stage including the stage of
     appeal or revision. He also submitted that the Supreme
     Court has held that the law
laid down in
the decision of the
     State of Haryana v. Bhajanlal, MANU/SC/0115/1992 : AIR
     1992 SC 604 has been correctly laid down. In view of the
     above decision it is apparent that the F.I.R. or the charge
     sheet if considered in its entirety and accepted to be true
     do not make out an offence, further investigation of
     cognizance upon the result of such investigation as the
     case may be should be quashed as it is the requirement of
     the ends of Justice. Sri Balai Ch. Roy also submitted that a
     Court proceeding ought not be permitted to degenerate
     into a weapon of harassment or persecution and in a lame
     prosecution it would be justified in quashing the
     proceeding in the interest of Justice. I do not see any
     reason to disagree with his submissions made above. The
     accused has been given the right by the Hon'ble Supreme
     Court to raise all legal and factual pleas available to him
     at the appropriate stage of the proceedings and in
     particular at the pre-trial stage and accordingly such
     pleas are being taken at this stage of quashing the
     proceedings and the investigations and nothing is wrong
     in it. It appears to me that the accused is within his right to
     raise his pleas available to him at this stage in the light of
     the order passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court on
     17.3.98. It was also rightly contended by Sri Balai Ch. Roy
     appearing on behalf of the petitioner that the Special
     Bench Judgment of Pawan Kumar Ruia v. S.P.C.B.I.
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                           Page 60 of 76
reported in 1995 C. Cr. L.R. (Cal) 1, has no binding effect
      in view of the order of the Supreme Court that the
      petitioner is entitled to raise all the questions of fact and
      law at the pre-trial stage which includes the stage of filing
      the F.I.R. and the stage of investigation. He further
      submitted that on such leave the petitioner moved at this
      pre-trial stage and even points decided earlier by this
      Hon'ble Court is subject to the observations of the
      Supreme Court, permitting all questions of fact and law to
      be urged at the pre-trial stage and accordingly the
      petitioner has done so and also raised other points which
      were not available to him earlier."
(emphasis supplied)
37.    The verdict of this Court in
Aman Vyas vs. Union of India
2019 SCC OnLine Del 9168 categorically observed to the effect that
the
Extradition Act, 1962
does not contemplate that a person against
whom a charge sheet has been filed only can be extradited in as much
as
Section 2(f)
of the said enactment is a generic word and would
include a person who is a suspect and accused of the commission of an
offence.
38.    On behalf of the petitioner it was submitted that the facts of the
present case are distinguishable from that in the case of AmanVyas vs.
Union of India (supra). The same is undoubtedly true. However, the
observations in the said verdict which categorically observe vide para
28 thereof to the effect:
"28.
Article 11(3)
of the Extradition Treaty states that "If
      the request relates to an accused person, it must also be
      accompanied by a warrant of arrest issued by a judge,
      magistrate or other competent authority in the territory of
      requesting state and by such evidence as, according to the
      law of the requested state, would justify his committal for
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                          Page 61 of 76
trial if the offence had been committed in the territory of the
      requested state, including evidence that the person
      requested is the person to whom the warrant of arrest
      refers. Thus even as per
Article 11(3)
of the Extradition
      Treaty the requirement is not that a chargesheet has been
      filed, but the material placed is sufficient to justify
      committal for trial i.e. there is prima facie material to
      satisfy the requested state that the fugitive is involved in
      the offence/ offences,"
(emphasis supplied)
make it apparent that in terms of
Article 11
Sub-clause 3 of the
Extradition Treaty between the United Kingdom and India, it is not
necessary that the extradition can be made only when a charge sheet
has been filed but if the material placed is sufficient to justify
committal for trial to indicate that there is prima facie material to
satisfy the Requested State that the fugitive is involved in the
offence/ offences, the same would suffice to grant the prayer for
extradition. It is essential to observe that the SLP (Crl.) No.6558-
6559/2019 filed against the
Aman Vyas vs. Union of India
(supra)
has been dismissed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court vide order dated
12.09.2019.
39.    It has been submitted on behalf of the petitioner that in the
instant case if the Investigating Agency sought to investigate the
matter further, it ought to have made it express and clear through the
submissions that have been made before the Westminster Magistrates'
Court as well as to the Divisional Court of the North Queen's Bench
Division before the Hon'ble England and Wales High Court and the
same having not been so done, the 'Rule of Speciality' in terms of the
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                           Page 62 of 76
Extradition Treaty ratified on 15.11.1993 between the Government of
Republic of India and the Government of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Island vide
Article 13
thereof are a
complete embargo to the conducting of any investigation by the
Requesting Statei.e. India and that in the event of the Requesting
State i.e. India submitting to the effect that the investigation and
interrogation of the petitioner can be conducted despite the factum that
the affidavit sworn by the Deputy Commissioner of Police, Crime
Branch, Delhi dated 18.05.2015 sworn before the CMM, New Delhi
and submitted as the affidavit in the matter of the extradition request
of the Government of the Republic of India for the extradition of the
petitioner herein as per provisions of the Extradition Treaty between
the Government of the Republic of India and the Government of
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Island, made it express
vide para 3 thereof to the effect:
"That the case is not time barred as envisaged under
Section 468
of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 of India.
     Further the Hon'ble court of Chief Metropolitan
     Magistrate, Patiala House Courts, New Delhi has already
     taken cognizance of the offences committed",
and that thus it had been stated categorically that cognizance of the
offences committed had already been taken and vide the timeline of
finalization of the case and filing of the final report/ charge sheet and
seeking extradition of the petitioner, it had been submitted to the
effect:
"8. Below mentioned are the reasons due to which the
     extradition request is being sent now;
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                         Page 63 of 76
(i) That the case was registered in the year 2000 and the
     voice samples of arrested accused persons namely Rajesh
     Kalra, Krishan Kumar and Sunil Dara @ Bittoo was also
     obtained in the year 2000.
(ii) The voice sample of the main conspirators namely
     Sanjeev Kumar Chawla and Hansie Cronje was not
     therewith the investigating agency,
(iii) Accordingly, requests were sent to South African and
     United Kingdom authorities through Letter Rogatory in the
     year 2000 and it was also requested to provide the voice
     sample of accused Sanjeev Kumar Chawla and Hansie
     Cronje.
(iv) The United Kingdom authorities in their reply sent in
     Letter Rogatory (Annexure U) informed that the subject
     Sanjeev Kumar Chawla had refused to give his voice
     sample.
(v) The South African authorities in the year 2003 informed
     that consequent upon the death of Hansie Cronje in a plane
     crash, they had closed the investigations and did not
     provided his voice sample. They provided a copy of the
     statements recorded by the Kings Commission of Enquiry.
(vi) In the year 2003 the voice sample of Hansie Cronje was
     obtained in the form his TV interview given to ESPN.
(vii) In the year 2004 Red Corner notice of the subject
     Sanjeev Kumar Chawla was got opened.
(viii) In the year 2004 open non bailable warrants against
     subject Sanjeev Chawla were obtained from the court.
(ix) Repeated efforts were made by sending various
     correspondences to the South African authorities to give
     detail reply as sought in the letter Rogatory.
(x) In the year 2009 the voice samples of accused persons
     namely Rajesh Kalra, Krishan Kumar, Sunil Dara @ Bittoo
     and Hansie Cronje were sent to Central Forensic Science
     Laboratory, New Delhi for comparison with the recorded
     conversations.
(xi) The Central Forensic Science Laboratory, New Delhi
     gave its report in the month of January 2013 and opined
     that the voice sample of all the four alleged Rajesh Kalra,
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                      Page 64 of 76
Krishan Kumar, Sunil Dara @ Bittoo and Hansie Cronje
     matches with the voices in the recorded conversations.
(xii) Consequent upon the receipt of the Central Forensic
     Science Laboratory report, the voluminous records were
     again gone through and final report in the form of
     chargesheet was prepared under
section 173
of Criminal
     Procedure Code and filed in the competent court in
     July2013.
(xiii) Subject Sanjeev Kumar Chawla has also been named
     as one of the accused in the report.
(xiv) That the offences for which accused Sanjeev Kumar
     Chawla hasbeen charged are not time barred and the
     Hon'ble trial court has taken cognizance of the offencesand
     has sought the extradition of subject Sanjeev KumarChawla
     (Annexure E)."
with it having been submitted categorically vide para 10 of the said
affidavit to the effect:
"10. That the offences for which the accused Sanjeev
     Kumar Chawla, the subject, is to be extradited are
     punishable with imprisonment for a maximum term of 7
     years. It is, therefore, necessary in the interest of justice
     that accused Sanjeev Kumar Chawla, the subject, be
     extradited from United Kingdom of Great Britain and
     Northern Ireland to India to face trial in the competent
     court, in this Case."
and that thus the State had merely sought the extradition of the
petitioner to face trial in the competent Court in this case and not
beyond and that nothing had prevented the Union of India to seek the
extradition of the petitioner for further investigation in the matter if it
was so required and that the petitioner can thus not be put to any
prejudice in relation thereto and no investigation can be conducted
anymore, nor can the petitioner be allowed to be interrogated.
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                           Page 65 of 76
40.    The learned ASG in response to this contention submitted that
the said affidavit sworn by the Deputy Commissioner of Police, Crime
Branch for the purpose of extradition proceedings as attested by the
CMM, New Delhi specifically stated vide its conclusion to the effect
that Sub-clause (1) to the effect:
"(i) On the basis of the investigation conducted so far,
      statements of witnesses recorded during investigation,
      conversations recorded between he accused in the seized
      audio and video cassettes, CFSL report and other
      documentary and oral evidence, it can be safely concluded
      that some of the matches were fixed and in some matches,
      an attempt was made to fix them, as explained in
      subsequent paragraphs."
and vide Sub-clause (3) to the effect:
"(iii) That from the investigation conducted so far there is
      sufficient evidence to prove that the accused persons
      namely Sanjeev Kumar Chawla, Hansie Cronje, Krishan
      Kumar, Rajesh Kalra, Sunil Dara @ Bittoo and Manmohan
      Khatter had entered into a criminal conspiracy to fix the
      cricket matches played between India and South Africa
      from 16.02.2000 to 20.03.2000 in India. In furtherance of
      this conspiracy, the 1stTest Match at Mumbai and the
      1stOne Day International at Cochin were fixed and the
      same resultedin wrongful gain to the accused and wrongful
      loss in general to the public at large, who had gone
      believing that they would witness truly competitive matches
      in which each player would perform optimally. The accused
      persons have thus committed offences punishable
u/s
      420
/
120B
of IPC."
and vide para 7 thereof it was observed to the effect:
"7. That on the basis of the above investigations a Final
      report under
section 173
of the Criminal Procedure Code
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                         Page 66 of 76
was filed in the court of Chief Metropolitan Magistrate,
      New Delhi on 22.07.2013 (Annexure D).That accused
      Sanjeev Kumar Chawla, the subject was not available for
      investigation since theregistration of case on 06.04.2000.
      Open Non-Bailable warrant ofarrest against him was
      issued by the court of Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi on
      02.09.2004. Certified copy of the Non Bailable Warrant is
      placed at (Annexure G). He held Indian passport No.A-
      1615336, which has since been cancelled by the Indian
      High Commission in London (U.K.) Thereafter a reference
      was made to Assistant Director, Interpol India for issue of
      Red Corner Notice against accused Sanjeev Kumar
      Chawla. This reference was forwarded by Interpol Delhi to
      Interpol Secretariat General for issuance of Red Comer
      Notice against accused Sanjeev Kumar Chawla, and for
      circulation to member countries. Thereafter, Interpol
      Secretariat General vide control No. A-1526/ 11-2004
      dated 09.11.2004 issued Red Corner Notice against
      accusedSanjeev Kumar Chawla and circulated the sameto
      its member countries. Copy of the Red Corner Notice is
      placed at (Annexure G). The Red Corner Notice seeks the
      arrest of the subject with a view to his subsequent
      extradition and such notice is issued only after (a) a wanted
      person has committed offence under ordinary criminal of
      the country (b) the warrant has been issued for his arrest
      and (c) Extradition of the person will be, requested
      consequentto his arrest."
that the petitioner herein was not available for investigation since
registration of the case on 06.04.2000 and that the final report under
Section 173
of the Cr.P.C., 1973, on which cognizance had been taken
was only to the extent of investigation conducted till then.
41.    It was submitted on behalf of the petitioner that vide clause 15
of the said affidavit of the DCP, Crime Branch, it had been sworn to
the effect:
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                         Page 67 of 76
"That accused Sanjeev Kumar Chawla will be tried in
     India only for the offences for which, this extradition is
     being sought or for lesser offences disclosed by the facts."
and that thus what had been stated therein was that the petitioner
would be tried in India only for the offences for which extradition was
being sought or for lesser offences disclosed by the facts and that it
had not been stipulated that there would be any further investigation
conducted.
In relation to this aspect, it is essential to observe that vide
verdict dated 23.01.2020 of the Divisional Court of the Hon'ble
Queen's Bench (2020) EWHC 102 (Admin) reference was made to
para 54 & 55 of the first judgment of the Divisional Court pursuant to
proceedings in the Westminster Magistrates' Court and it was
observed vide paras 54 & 55 of the said verdict of the Divisional
Court as well as adverted to paras 54 & 55 of the first judgment of the
Divisional Court in relation to the petitioner to the effect:
"54. In these circumstances if matters remain as they are
     the appeal will be dismissed. However, it is apparent that it
     will be possible to meet the real risk of
article 3
treatment
     by offering a suitable assurance that Mr. Chawla will be
     kept in
article 3
compliant conditions in Tihar prison
     before, during trial and, in the event of conviction and
     sentence of imprisonment, after trial. Such an assurance
     will need to: address the personal space available to Mr
     Chawla in Tihar prisons; the toilet facilities available to
     him; identify the ways in which Mr Chawla will be kept free
     from the risk of intra-prisoner violence in the High Security
     wards; and repeat the guarantee of medical treatment for
     Mr Chawla.
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                           Page 68 of 76
55. Therefore, following the approach set out in Georgiev
     at paragraph 8(ix) and (x), we stay the appeal to give the
     Government an opportunity to provide further assurances.
     We require a response from the CPS within 42 days of the
     date of the handing down of this judgment. We give
     permission to apply to both parties as regards the wording
     of any further assurances, the timing for their production,
     and the final disposal of this appeal."
making it thus apparent that the aspect of the petitioner being
extradited to India even for the stage prior to trial was within the
contours of knowledge of the Requested State. The same is also
brought forth through observations in para 52 of the verdict dated
23.01.2020 of the Divisional Court vide which the permission sought
by the petitioner herein seeking to leave to appeal against the
Westminster Magistrates' Court sending case to the Secretary of State
for his decision on whether the petitioner be extradited to India, was
declined. The said observations in para 52 of the said verdict reads to
the effect:
"52 Mr Powles also seeks to contend that there is a real
     risk that the police would seek to rely on evidence obtained
     by torture. The basis of this allegation is that three of Mr
     Chawla's co-accused have made confessions which
     implicate Mr Chawla. One of these, MrKalra, made an
     application to the Delhi Magistrates' Court in April 2000
     contending that he had been the subject of high-handed
     treatment by the police and that they had forcibly extracted
     his signature on a blank piece of paper. The application
     was said to be an application for directions to the police.
     Mr Powles confirmed in oral submissions that there was no
     evidence before this court as to what happened to this
     application. MrKalra subsequently made a written
     confession implicating Mr Chawla. Mr Powles does not
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                        Page 69 of 76
suggest that there is any evidence that the confession was
      written by police on the blank piece of paper that MrKalra
      was allegedly forced to sign. There is no evidence before
      this court indicating that MrKalra's confession, or that of
      the other two co-accused were extracted by torture or
      improper means. Mr Powles invites us to infer that that may
      be the case as the three co-accused have, it seems,
      maintained their pleas of not guilty and have not yet been
      tried. There is simply no realistic basis upon which the fact
      that an application was made in 2000 alleging police high-
      handedness or the forcible extraction of a signature on a
      blank sheet of paper could give rise to any real risk that Mr
      Chawla would not have a fair trial because the authorities
      would rely on evidence obtained by torture. The suggestion,
      on the limited evidence available, is speculative in the
      extreme."
and thus spells out clearly the aspect of investigation being implicitly
falling within the ambit of the scope of the purpose for which the
extradition of the petitioner was granted.
CONCLUSION
42.     In the circumstances, thus where the learned Additional
Solicitor General for the Hon'ble Supreme Court,Mr. Sanjay Jain on
behalf of the Union of India has expressly stated to the effect that the
terms of the Letter of Assurances dated 28.02.2017, 22.09.2017 and
11.06.2018 would      be followed in letter and spirit and that the
petitioner would not be taken out of the Tihar Jail complex except
with permission, if any, granted by the Court, in terms of
Section
173(8)
of the Cr.PC, 1973 in as much as the petitioner herein has
never joined the investigation since so far and the submission made on
behalf of the State that it seeks to conduct an interrogation of the
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                         Page 70 of 76
petitioner to confront him with the aspects of the investigation
conducted previously to unearth the conspiracy in relation to the
match fixing in question, coupled with the express submission made
by the learned ASG for the Union of India that no investigation nor
interrogation in relation to any offence other than that punishable
under
Sections 420
/
120B
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 or a lesser
offence than that for which he has been extradited or any other offence
qua which consent had been taken or would be taken from the
Requested State, would be conducted, which this Court accepts as
being the solemn assurance and undertaking of the Union of India, the
petition is disposed of with directions to the effect that the impugned
order dated 13.02.2020 of the learned trial Court granting police
custody remand of 12 days of the petitioner, is modified to the effect
that the petitioner during the entire stage of pre-trial detention, trial
and conviction, if any, in terms of the Letter of Assurances dated
28.02.2017, 22.09.2017 and 11.06.2018 would continue to be lodged
at the Tihar Jail complex in adherance with the terms of the said Letter
of Assurances dated 28.02.2017, 22.09.2017 and 11.06.2018 and
cannot be allowed to be taken out of the Tihar Jail complex for the
purpose of investigation or interrogation in police custody, though the
Investigating Agency in the matter is permitted to conduct the
interrogation of the petitioner at the Tihar Jail complex only in terms
of the timeline stipulated in terms of
Section 167 (2)
of the Cr.PC,
1973, which reads to the effect:
"(2) The Magistrate to whom an accused person is
     forwarded under this section may, whether he has or has not
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                         Page 71 of 76
jurisdiction to try the case, from time to time, authorise the
     detention of the accused in such custody as such Magistrate
     thinks fit, for a term not exceeding fifteen days in the whole;
and if he has no jurisdiction to try the case or commit it for
     trial, and considers further detention unnecessary, he may
     order the accused to be forwarded to a Magistrate having
     such jurisdiction: Provided that-
(a) 1 the Magistrate may authorise the detention of the
        accused person, otherwise than in the custody of the
        police, beyond the period of fifteen days; if he is satisfied
        that adequate grounds exist for doing so, but no
        Magistrate shall authorise the detention of the accused
        person in custody under this paragraph for a total period
        exceeding,-
(i) ninety days, where the investigation relates to an
        offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or
        imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years;
(ii) sixty days, where the investigation relates to any other
        offence, and, on the expiry of the said period of ninety
        days, or sixty days, as the case may be, the accused
        person shall be released on bail if he is prepared to and
        does furnish bail, and every person released on bail under
        this sub- section shall be deemed to be so released under
        the provisions of Chapter XXXIII for the purposes of that
        Chapter;]
(b) no Magistrate shall authorise detention in any custody
        under this section unless the accused is produced before
        him;
(c) no Magistrate of the second class, not specially
        empowered in this behalf by the High Court, shall
        authorise detention in the custody of the police. 1
        Explanation I.- For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby
        declared that, notwithstanding the expiry of the period
        specified in paragraph (a), the accused shall be detained
        in custody so long as he does not furnish bail;]. 2
        Explanation II.- If any question arises whether an accused
        person was produced before the Magistrate as required
        under paragraph (b), the production of the accused
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                          Page 72 of 76
person may be proved by his signature on the order
          authorising detention.]",
that is to the extent of the period of a term not exceeding 15 days
from the date of arrest of the petitioner herein i.e. not exceeding a
period of 15 days from the date and time of the arrest of the petitioner
i.e. 13.02.2020 at 2:00 hours IST, which period would thus end on
28.02.2020 at 2 am, whereafter, no further interrogation of the
petitioner in relation to the FIR No.111/2000, PS Chanakyapuri can be
granted nor is granted. The Investigating Agency may utilize the
technology of video conferencing as submitted by the learned ASGfor
conducting the investigation and interrogation to the extent as prayed
in the application of the State dated 13.02.2020 submitted before the
learned trial Court. As regards any follow up action required for the
investigation and interrogation to the extent permitted hereinabove,
the State may seek the permission of the Trial Court seized of the
matter.
43.    This is so in as much as, as
laid down by
the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in
Central Bureau of Investigation vs. Anupam J. Kulkarni
(1992) 3 SCC 141 vide para 13 thereof to the effect:
"13. Whenever any person is arrested under Section 57 Cr.
      PC he should be produced before the nearest Magistrate
      within 24 hours as mentioned therein. Such Magistrate may
      or may not have jurisdiction to try the case. If Judicial
      Magistrate is not available, the police officer may transmit
      the arrested accused to the nearest Executive Magistrate on
      whom the judicial powers have been conferred. The
      Judicial Magistrate can in the first instance authorise the
      detention of the accused in such custody i.e., either police
      or judicial from time to time but the total period of
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                        Page 73 of 76
detention cannot exceed fifteen days in the whole. Within
     this period of fifteen days there can be more than one
     order changing the nature of such custody either from
     police to judicial or vice-versa. If the arrested accused is
     produced before the Executive Magistrate he is empowered
     to authorise the detention in such custody either police or
     judicial only for a week, in the same manner namely by one
     or more orders but after one week he should transmit him
     to the nearest Judicial Magistrate alongwith the records.
     When the arrested accused is so transmitted the Judicial
     Magistrate, for the remaining period, that is to say
     excluding one week or the number of days of detention
     ordered by the Executive Magistrate, may authorise further
     detention within that period of first fifteen days to such
     custody either police or judicial. After the expiry of the
     first period of fifteen days the further remand during the
     period of investigation - can only be in judicial custody.
     There can not be any detention in the police custody after
     the expiry of first fifteen days even in a case where some
     more offences either serious or otherwise committed by
     him in the same transaction come to light at a later stage.
     But this bar does not apply if the same arrested accused is
     involved in a different case arising out of a different
     transaction. Even if he is in judicial custody in connection
     with the investigation of the earlier - case he can formally
     be arrested regarding his involvement in the different case
     and associate him with the investigation of that other case
     and the Magistrate can act as provided under Section
     167(2) and the proviso and can remand him to such custody
     as mentioned therein during the first period of fifteen days
     and thereafter in accordance with the proviso as discussed
     above. If the investigation is not completed within the
     period of ninety days or sixty days then the accused has to
     be released on bail as provided under the proviso to Section
     167(2). The period of ninety days or sixty days has to be
     computed from the date of detention as per the orders of the
     Magistrate and not from the date of arrest by the police.
     Consequently the first period of fifteen days mentioned in
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                       Page 74 of 76
Section 167(2) has to be computed from the date of such
     detention and after the expiry of the period of first fifteen
     days it should be only judicial custody."
(emphasis supplied)
vide which verdict, the Hon'ble Supreme Court approved the view
laid down by
the Division Bench of this Court in
State(Delhi
Administration) vs. Dharam Pal and Others
. 1981 SCC Online Del
368 vide para 24 thereof to the effect:
"24. We have already set out the provisions of the Section
     and also the interpretation to be given to the Section. We
     must keep in view that the object of the Section is to
     facilitate investigation into an offence. We completely agree
     with Hardy J., in coming to the conclusion that the
     Magistrate has to find out whether there is a good case for
     grant of police custody. There is no sign in the Section that
     the nature of the custody cannot be altered. In fact,
     experience would show that investigation would be
     hampered and made more difficult if the nature of the
     custody was not capable of alteration in the first 15 days. It
     might be necessary to send the accused to a hospital for
     examination, or to produce him before a Magistrate for
     recording a confession, in such cases, a useful precaution
     to take is to send the accused to judicial custody so that the
     confession might be free and without pressure. Another
     example is provided on the facts of this case for enabling an
     identification parade to be held in the jail. Another
     possibility is that the police may not require the prisoner
     immediately for lack of material which might be
     forthcoming later. In such a case the period of police
     custody might be shortened by remanding the prisoner to
     judicial custody while the police is collecting the necessary
     material for further investigation. There can be many
     examples of this type dependent on the circumstances of the
     case."
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                         Page 75 of 76
as adhered to by this Court in
Rajiv Jain vs. State & Another
2017
SCC OnLine Del 10354 vide observations in para 2 of the said
verdict, this Court is respectfully unable to accept the reliance placed
vide the impugned order of the learned trial Court on the observations
of the High Court of Bombay in "
Alim A. Patel vs. State of
Maharashtra
"2011 (2) AIR BOM R 271 that an accused could be
remanded to police custody even after 15 days excluding the period of
bail where an accused has never remained in custody for even a single
day.
44.    The Investigating Agency shall however take care to ensure
that the petitioner is treated with dignity during the investigation and
interrogation conducted.
45.    Furthermore, the Superintendent Jail shall adhere to the
Letter of Assurances dated 28.02.2017, 22.09.2017 and 11.06.2018
as issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India in
letter and spirit.
46.    Copy of this order be supplied to either side and be sent to the
Superintendent, Tihar Jail, Delhi for compliance.
ANU MALHOTRA, J.
FEBRUARY 20th, 2020
'Neha Chopra'/SV/vm
CRL.M.C.870/2020                                        Page 76 of 76