SOURCE: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/84823037/
SCRAPED: 2026-02-18T10:27:21.143185
TITLE: Full Document
================================================================================

[Cites
38
, Cited by
0
]
Manipur High Court
Mds Nordon Inc vs Central Bureau Of Investigation on 3 October, 2025
Author:
Ahanthem Bimol Singh
Bench:
Ahanthem Bimol Singh
SHOUGRAKPAM Digitally signed by
            SHOUGRAKPAM                            [1]
DEVANANDA   DEVANANDA SINGH
            Date: 2025.10.03 16:18:19
SINGH       +05'30'


                              IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
                                            AT IMPHAL
                                  Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017


                   MDS Nordon Inc., 447 March Road, Ottawa, Ontario,
                   K2KIX8, Canada represented by Power of Attorney holder,
                   Vinay Prakash Singh, s/o (L) Sh. J.P. Singh of F-1 Deepali
                   Apt., B-Block, Ramprastha Colony, Ghaziabad-201011.
                                                                        ... Petitioner
                                        -Versus-

                   1. Central Bureau of Investigation, represented by its
                      Superintendent of Police, Anti-Corruption Branch, Imphal,
                      Manipur.
                                                                     ... Respondent
                   2. Dr. Lallukham Fimate, S/o (L) H.L. Ngura of Langol near
                      Sija Hospital, Imphal, P.O & P.S. Lamphel, Imphal District,
                      Manipur.
                   3. Dr. Thoudem Tomcha Singh, S/o (L) Th. Kulladhaja Singh
                      of Khabam Lamkhai, Imphal, Manipur, P.O. Mantripukhri
                      and P.S. Heingang, Imphal East District, Manipur.
                   4. Dr. Sinam Sekharjit Singh, S/o S. Digendra Singh of
                      Singjamei Chaingamathak Pishum Leikai, Imphal,
                      Manipur, P.O. Imphal P.S. Singjamei, Imphal West
                      District.
                   5. Shahid Hussain S/o Muhmmad Hussain, 101 Golden
                      Sands Compound King Abdul Aziz Road Jubali Saudi
                      Arabia-31961.
                   6. Kirloskar Technologies Pvt. Ltd, M-26, Sector II, Noida,
                      UP201301/B-58, Defence Colony, 1st Floor, Bishma
                      Pitamah Marg, New Delhi, represented by its P.O.A
                      holder, Himansu Sharma s/o Sh. Kamal Kumar Sharma of
                      77/10, Barh Mohalla, Old Faridabad, Haryana 121001.

                                                         ... Proforma Respondents

             Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                   Contd.../-
                                     [2]



            - AND -
         IN THE MATTER OF: -
         (Special Trial Case No. 12 of 2017 of the Special
         Judge (PC) Act, Imphal West)
         Central Bureau of Investigation, represented by its
         Superintendent of Police, Anti-Corruption Branch,
         Imphal, Manipur.
                                                       ...Complainant
                                 -Versus -
      1. Dr. Lallukham Fimate, S/o (L) H.L. Ngura of Langol near
         Shija Hospital, Imphal, P.O & P.S. Lamphel, Imphal
         District, Manipur.
      2. Dr. Thoudem Tomcha Singh, S/o (L) Th. Kulladhaja
         Singh of Khabam Lamkhai, Imphal, Manipur, P.O.
         Mantripukhri and P.S. Heingang, Imphal East District,
         Manipur.
      3. Dr. Sinam Sekharjit Singh, S/o (L) S. Digendra Singh of
         Singjamei Chaingamathak Pishum Leikai, Imphal,
         Manipur, P.O. Imphal P.S. Singjamei, Imphal West
         District.
      4. Shahid Hussain S/o Muhmmad Hussain, 101 Golden
         Sands Compound King Abdul Aziz Road Jubali Saudi
         Arabia-31961.
      5. Kirloskar Technologies Pvt. Ltd, M-26, Sector-II, Noida,
         UP-201301/B-58, Defence Colony, 1™ Floor, Bishma
         Pitamah Marg, New Delhi, represented by its P.O.A
         holder, Himansu Sharma s/o Sh. Kamal Kumar Sharma
         of 77/10, Barh Mohalla, Old Faridabad, Haryana 121001.
      6. MDS Nordon Inc., 447 March Road, Ottawa, Ontario,
         K2KIX8, Canada represented by P.O.A holder, Vinay
         Prakash Singh, s/o (L) Sh. J.P. Singh of F-1 Deepali Apt.,
         B- Block, Ramprastha Colony, Ghaziabad - 201011.
                                                      ... Accused


Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                  Contd.../-
                                        [3]



                       B E F O R E
         HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AHANTHEM BIMOL SINGH

       For the petitioner         ::   Mr. Amit Kumar, Sr. Advocate asstd.
                                       by Mr. Tanmay Arora, Advocate,
                                       Mr. L. Sanamacha, Advocate,
                                       Ms. Anindita Barman, Advocate
       For the respondents        ::   Mr. W. Darakishwor, Sr. Panel
                                       Counsel
       Date of hearing            ::   23-07-2025
       Date of judgment & order ::     03-10-2025

                            JUDGMENT & ORDER

[1]          Heard Mr. Amit Kumar, learned senior counsel assisted

by Mr. Tanmay Arora, Advocate, Mr. L. Sanamacha, learned counsel,

Ms. Anindita Barman, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and

Mr. W. Darakishwor, learned senior panel counsel appearing for the

respondent No. 1. None appeared for the proforma respondents Nos. 2

to 6


             The present petition has been filed under Section 397 read

with
Section 401
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 ("
CrPC
"),

seeking to set aside the judgment and order dated 08-09-2017 passed

by the Special Judge (PC) Act, Imphal West, in Special Trial (PC) Case

No. 12 of 2016 ("Trial Court"), whereby the Trial Court dismissed the

application for discharge filed by the petitioner and passed a separate

order on the same date whereby charges were framed against the

Petitioner (i.e., Accused No. 6) under
Section 420
of the IPC.



 Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                   Contd.../-
                                     [4]



[2]       The brief facts which culminates in filing of the present revision

petition are that in 2006, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare,

Government of India, issued a grant of Rs. 5 crores to RIMS for

establishment of a Regional Cancer Centre. The said grant was for civil

work (construction of a building) as well as for the procurement of

Telecobalt machine with all essential accessories. Out of the said grant

of Rs. 5 crores, 1.5 crores was earmarked for construction of building

and Rs. 3.5 crore was allocated for the purchase of the said equipment.


[3]       The Director of Regional Institute of Medical Sciences (RIMS),

Shri L. Fimate, through a publication in newspaper dated 08-03-2007

invited Sealed Tenders for supply of telecobalt machine and interested

parties were required to submit their respective bids on or before

15-03-2007. Altogether five parties, including the petitioner, submitted

their tender forms along with proforma invoice with price and

specification. The Tender Opening Committee opened the five sealed

cover tenders on 23-03-2007 and the tender quotation of the petitioner

submitted by Kirloskar (Accused No. 5), which is an agent of the

petitioner company, was unanimously accepted since the other four

tenders lacked three essential features i.e. Isocentric at 100 cm, 250

RMM output source and collision detection device. As far as the rates

quoted are concerned, three firms quoted the rates ranging from Rs.

2,98,40,000/- to Rs. 3,05,15,000/- while M/s Panacea quoted Rs.


 Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                    Contd.../-
                                       [5]



1,59,00,000/- and the petitioner's agent M/s Kirloskar quoted Rs.

2,47,00.000/- (exclusive of taxes).


[4]       After going through the tender process, the Purchase Advisory

Board decided to procure equipment of the petitioner company as it fulfils

all the specifications of the tender and its reputation as a brand.

Thereafter, the RIMS awarded the said tender for supply of telecobalt

unit to the petitioner company by issuing supply order dated 24-09-2007.

As per the terms and conditions agreed between the parties, RIMS made

an initial payment of 90 percent of the value of the telecobalt unit at the

time of successful negotiation and the remaining 10 percent was to be

paid upon installation. The payment terms of the proforma invoice dated

08-03-2007 provides that in case installation of equipment gets delayed

for reasons beyond control of the petitioner company, then the payment

should be released to the petitioner company within 30 days of handing

over the telecobalt unit in working condition.


[5]       It is on record that the civil work for construction of the building

could not be completed on scheduled due to reasons best known to

RIMS. In addition, as per the guidelines of Atomic Energy Regulatory

Board "AERB", adequate number of staff and uninterrupted power

supply was also needed for commissioning and functioning of the

telecobalt unit and the same was to be arranged by RIMS, which could

not be done in time. Therefore, the agent of the petitioner was unable to

 Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                      Contd.../-
                                    [6]



install the machine at that point of time and the equipment was finally

installed on 25-09-2011. Thereafter, by a letter dated 26-09-2011, the

agent of the petitioner requested RIMS to release the balance 10 percent

payment against the supply of the telecobalt unit and further undertook

to commission the unit satisfactory after procurement of power supply

and telecobalt source after getting necessary clearance/ No-Objection

Certificate from AERB, as required by RIMS. Pursuant to the said

request and the undertaking, RIMS released the balance payment to the

petitioner company.


[6]       Nearly five years later, it was brought to the attention of the

petitioner company that due to certain alleged irregularities in the

procurement of telecobalt unit, the CBI, respondent No. 1 herein, had

registered and FIR being FIR No. RC 5(A)/2014-IMP u/s 120-B &
420
read with
Section 13(2)
&
Section 13(1)(d)
of the Prevention of

Corruption Act against only two officials of RIMS, viz. Dr. L. Fimate, the

then Director, RIMS, Imphal (as Accused No. 1) and Dr. Th. Tomcha

Singh, Head of Department (Radiotherapy), RIMS (as Accused No. 2).

In the said FIR, the petitioner company was not arrayed as an accused.


[7]       The respondent No. 1, i.e., CBI, submitted its Charge-Sheet

on 11-04-2016 wherein only Accused Nos. 1 to 5 were charged under

Section 120B read with
Section 420
IPC and under
Section 13(2)
read

with
Section 13(1)(d)
of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. In the

 Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                   Contd.../-
                                    [7]



said Charge-Sheet, the petitioner company was arrayed as Accused

No. 6, and no Charge-Sheet had been filed against the petitioner

company under any provision of the
IPC
or
PC Act
. Except for the

allegation that conduct of the petitioner company constitutes an offence

punishable under
Section 420
of the IPC, nothing has been alleged or

even remotely brought on record so as to suspect that any act has been

done by the petitioner constituting an offence under
Section 420
of the

IPC. Having been aggrieved, the petitioner company filed an application

on 27-03-2017 to discharge the petitioner from criminal proceedings

initiated against it on the ground that there is no case against the

petitioner company. However, by the impugned judgement and order

dated 08-09-2017 passed in Special Trial (PC) Case No. 12 of 2016, the

Trial Court dismissed the discharge application filed by the petitioner

company and charges under
Section 420
of the IPC were framed against

the petitioner company. Feeling aggrieved, the petitioner company filed

the present revision petition with the prayer for setting aside the

impugned judgement and order dated 08-09-2017 passed by the Trial

Court in Special Trial (PC) Case No. 12 of 2016 and to discharge the

petitioner from the said criminal proceedings.


[8]       Mr Amit Kumar, learned Senior counsel appearing for the

petitioner submitted that the petitioner is a foreign company duly

incorporated under the laws of Canada and has more than 50 years of


 Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                 Contd.../-
                                    [8]



experience in manufacturing and supplying telecobalt machines all over

the world and that more than 90% of telecobalt machines available in

India have been manufactured and supplied by the petitioner company.

It has been submitted that the petitioner company had supplied the

machines to many prominent hospitals such as AIIMS, Delhi, PGI,

Chandigarh, etc.


          The learned counsel further submitted that M/s. Kirloskar

Technologies Pvt. Ltd. is the Indian agent of the petitioner company and

the tender bid was submitted through the said Indian agent. It has been

submitted that the selection of the petitioner's machine was made by the

Purchase Advisory Board (PAB) comprising experts from AIIMs and

RIMS after due evaluation and for reasons that it met all the technical

specifications which were advertised in the tender notice. It has the

maximum number of machines supplied in the country. RIMS is already

using a similar machine supplied by the petitioner and it has all the

features of patient safety which were critical to a life-saving machine

while all the other machines submitted by the four other bidders did not

meet the required specification advertised in the tender notice.


[9]       The learned senior counsel raised the following five grounds

in assailing the impugned judgment and order passed by the trial court:-

      (a) In the entire charge-sheet, there is no material whatsoever to

          even prima facie shows that the ingredients of offence under

 Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                    Contd.../-
                                    [9]
Section 420
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, have been made

           out against the petitioner (Accused No. 6.).


       (b) No offence of cheating under
Section 420
IPC can be

           attributed to the petitioner company in the absence of any

           allegations or materials against the Directors or Key

           Managerial Personnel of the Company.


       (c) There is no allegation or charge against the petitioner

           company (Accused No. 6) under
Section 120-B
of the IPC that

           it conspires with any of the remaining accused persons to

           commit the offence of cheating.


       (d) Total absence of prima facie materials to establish grave

           suspicion against the petitioner (Accused No. 6).


       (e) The decision of the coordinate bench of this court discharging

           Accused No. 1 from the Trial Court proceedings ought to be

           taken into consideration in deciding the present case.


[10]      Elaborating the above grounds, it has been submitted by the

learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner as under:-

   (a-1) The petitioner, a globally recognized manufacturer of

          telecobalt machines, had no direct dealings with Accused

          Nos. 1, 2 and 3 apart from the submission of a single proforma

          invoice through its Indian agent, M/s Kirloskar Technologies

 Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                     Contd.../-
                                   [10]



         Pvt. Ltd. The selection of the petitioner's machine was made

         by the Purchase Advisory Board (PAB), comprising experts

         from AIIMS and RIMS, after due evaluation of all the tenders

         submitted by five bidders and on the findings that only the

         petitioner's machine met all the technical specifications

         advertised in the tender notice while the four other bids did

         not met the required technical specifications. It has been

         submitted that the charge-sheet itself reveals that the machine

         of Panacea Medical Technology Pvt. Ltd., who submitted the

         lowest bid, did not met the essential technical requirements

         of the tender. Consequently, it was not even eligible for the bid,

         rendering any comparison with the petitioner's bid baseless.

         As the machine of Panacea Medical Technology Pvt. Ltd.

         being technically non-compliant, the price quoted by the said

         company cannot be used as a benchmark to allege that the

         petitioner quoted a higher price and that such a comparison is

         not only misleading but also irrelevant in the context of a

         disqualified bid. The learned senior counsel further submitted

         that even assuming, without admitting, that the price quoted

         by the petitioner was higher than the other bidders, no offence

         under
Section 420
IPC is made out as there is no allegation

         in the charge-sheet, let alone, evidence of any dishonest



Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                    Contd.../-
                                      [11]



          intention or inducement on the part of the petitioner, both of

          which are essential ingredients of the offence of cheating. It

          has been strenuously submitted on behalf of the petitioner that

          what clearly emerges from the charge-sheet is that the

          machine supplied by the petitioner was the only one meeting

          the tender specifications outlined in the tender notice dated

          01-03-2007 and that there is complete absence of any material

          in the charge-sheet indicating that the petitioner made any

          inducement to any person which is fraudulent, dishonest, or

          otherwise to prove the offence of cheating. It has been

          submitted that to prove an offence of cheating one must

          establish that there was an inducement since inception, the

          inducement was fraudulent or dishonest and mens rea existed

          at the time of such inducement. In support of his submission,

          the learned senior counsel cited the following case laws:-


    (i)   (2018) 14 SCC-233 "Samir Sahay Vs. State of Uttar
          Pradesh & anr." wherein it has been held as under:-

    "16. Before we proceed further to examine the contentions of the learned
         counsel for the parties, it is necessary to notice the ingredients for
         establishing a charge under
Section 420
IPC.
Section 415
IPC
         defines "cheating" which is to the following effect:
          "415. Cheating.--Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently
                or dishonestly induces the person so deceived to deliver any
                property to any person, or to consent that any person shall
                retain any property, or intentionally induces the person so
                deceived to do or omit to do anything which he would not do
                or omit if he were not so deceived, and which act or omission



Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                           Contd.../-
                                      [12]



                causes or is likely to cause damage or harm to that person in
                body, mind, reputation or property, is said to "cheat"."
    "17.
Section 420
IPC is with regard to the cheating and dishonestly
         inducing delivery of property which is to the following effect:
         "420. Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property.--
               Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly induces the person
               deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to make,
               alter or destroy the whole or any part of a valuable security,
               or anything which is signed or sealed, and which is capable
               of being converted into a valuable security, shall be punished
               with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
               extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine."
    "18. According to
Section 415
IPC, the inducement must be fraudulent
         and dishonest which depends upon the intention of the accused at
         the time of inducement. This Court had occasion to consider
Sections 415
and
420
IPC in Hridaya Ranjan Prasad Verma v. State of
         Bihar [Hridaya Ranjan Prasad Verma v. State of Bihar. This Court
         after noticing the provisions of
Sections 415
and
420
IPC stated the
         following in paras 14 and 15: (SCC pp. 176-77)
         "14. On a reading of the section it is manifest that in the definition
              there are set forth two separate classes of acts which the
              person deceived may be induced to do. In the first place he may
              be induced fraudulently or dishonestly to deliver any property
              to any person. The second class of acts set forth in the section
              is the doing or omitting to do anything which the person
              deceived would not do or omit to do if he were not so deceived.
              In the first class of cases the inducing must be fraudulent or
              dishonest. In the second class of acts, the inducing must be
              intentional but not fraudulent or dishonest.
         "15. In determining the question it has to be kept in mind that the
              distinction between mere breach of contract and the offence of
              cheating is a fine one. It depends upon the intention of the
              accused at the time of inducement which may be judged by his
              subsequent conduct but for this subsequent conduct is not the
              sole test. Mere breach of contract cannot give rise to criminal
              prosecution for cheating unless fraudulent or dishonest
              intention is shown right at the beginning of the transaction, that
              is the time when the offence is said to have been committed.
              Therefore it is the intention which is the gist of the offence. To
              hold a person guilty of cheating it is necessary to show that he
              had fraudulent or dishonest intention at the time of making the
              promise. From his mere failure to keep up promise
              subsequently such a culpable intention right at the beginning,
              that is, when he made the promise cannot be presumed."


Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                           Contd.../-
                                      [13]



    "19. Again in Dalip Kaur v. Jagnar Singh, this Court noticed the
         ingredients of
Section 420
IPC. In paras 9 to 11 the following was
         stated: (SCC pp. 699-700)
         "9.   The ingredients of Section 420 of the Penal Code are:
               '(i) Deception of any persons;
               (ii) Fraudulently or dishonestly inducing any person to deliver
                    any property; or
               (iii) To consent that any person shall retain any property and
                     finally intentionally inducing that person to do or omit to
                     do anything which he would not do or omit.'
         "10. The High Court, therefore, should have posed a question as to
              whether any act of inducement on the part of the appellant has
              been raised by the second respondent and whether the
              appellant had an intention to cheat him from the very inception.
              If the dispute between the parties was essentially a civil dispute
              resulting from a breach of contract on the part of the appellants
              by non-refunding the amount of advance the same would not
              constitute an offence of cheating. Similar is the legal position
              in respect of an offence of criminal breach of trust having
              regard to its definition contained in Section 405 of the Penal
              Code. (See Ajay Mitra v. State of M.P."
         "11. There cannot furthermore be any doubt that the High Court
              would exercise its inherent jurisdiction only when one or
              the other propositions of law, as laid down in R. Kalyani
              v. Janak C. Mehta [R. Kalyani v. Janak C. Mehta is attracted,
              which are as under: (SCC p. 523, para 15)
               (1) The High Court ordinarily would not exercise its inherent
                   jurisdiction to quash a criminal proceeding and, in
                   particular, a first information report unless the allegations
                   contained therein, even if given face value and taken to be
                   correct in their entirety, disclosed no cognizable offence.
               (2) For the said purpose the Court, save and except in very
                   exceptional circumstances, would not look to any
                   document relied upon by the defence.
               (3) Such a power should be exercised very sparingly. If the
                   allegations made in the FIR disclose commission of an
                   offence, the Court shall not go beyond the same and pass
                   an order in favour of the accused to hold absence of any
                   mens rea or actus reus.
               (4) If the allegation discloses a civil dispute, the same by itself
                   may not be a ground to hold that the criminal proceedings
                   should not be allowed to continue."


Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                             Contd.../-
                                          [14]



    "20. Applying the ratio laid down by this Court as noted above, it is clear
         that ingredients of
Section 420
IPC are not made out in the present
         case, either from the first information report or from any other
         material. From the first information report as extracted above only
         allegation made against the appellant was that he accompanied his
         father Major P.C. Sahay (Retd.) when he assured that the money of
         the applicants will not be lost and it shall be the responsibility of his
         father (late P.C. Sahay). The following allegations made in the first
         information report need to be specially noticed:

                "Along with him his son Samir Sahay, Advocate who was already
                 acquainted with the applicant also accompanied his father. Major
                 P.C. Sahay gave the abovesaid assurance, and the applicant and
                 his wife Smt Uma Devi deposited rupees one lakh with Major P.C.
                 Sahay in this regard and he gave the receipt of the same to the
                 applicant of which the applicant is enclosing the photocopy. Like
                 this Major P.C. Sahay (retired) has got deposited total amount of
                 Rs 86,000 from me and my wife. But after some days it came to
                 be known that the said Company has run away along with the
                 lakhs of rupees of the depositors after closing its office."

    (ii) (2024) 10 SCC-690 "Delhi Race Club (1940) Limited & ors.
          Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh & anr." wherein it has been held
          as under:-

    "36. What can be discerned from the above is that the offences of criminal
         breach of trust (
Section 406
IPC) and cheating (
Section 420
IPC) have
         specific ingredients:
          In order to constitute a criminal breach of trust (
Section 406
IPC)
          (1)    There must be entrustment with person for property or
                 dominion over the property, and
          (2)    The person entrusted:
                  (a)   Dishonestly misappropriated or converted property to his
                        own use, or
                  (b) Dishonestly used or disposed of the property or wilfully
                      suffers any other person so to do in violation of:
                        (i) Any direction of law prescribing the method in which
                            the trust is discharged; or
                        (ii) Legal contract touching the discharge of trust
                             (see: S.W. Palanitkar)



Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                              Contd.../-
                                     [15]



         Similarly, in respect of an offence under
Section 420
IPC, the
         essential ingredients are:
         (1) Deception of any person, either by making a false or misleading
             representation or by other action or by omission;
         (2) Fraudulently or dishonestly inducing any person to deliver any
             property, or
         (3) The consent that any person shall retain any property and
             finally intentionally inducing that person to do or omit to do
             anything which he would not do or omit (see: Harmanpreet
             Singh Ahluwalia v. State of Punjab [Harmanpreet Singh
             Ahluwalia v. State of Punjab.)"
    "37. Further, in both the aforesaid sections, mens rea i.e. intention to
         defraud or the dishonest intention must be present, and in the case
         of cheating it must be there from the very beginning or inception."

  (b-1) It has been submitted on behalf of the petitioner that the

         company alone, in absence of any allegations against its

         Directors or those who are controlling the affairs of the

         company, cannot be made an accuse for an offence of

         cheating inasmuch as, cheating involves mental element i.e.,

         mens rea and that there is a legal bar to proceed against the

         company for the offence of cheating in absence of material to

         show that the Directors or the controlling mind and will of the

         company had intention to cheat and/ or fraudulently and

         dishonestly to induce someone. In the charge-sheet, the

         prosecution mindlessly charged the petitioner through its Chief

         Operating Officer, Scott Macintosh and presently through Best

         Theatronics of Canada and its Director Andrei Criesianu and

         through its Indian Agent M/s Kirloskar Technologies Private



Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                        Contd.../-
                                  [16]



         Limited under
Section 420
of the IPC. However, by an order

         dated 08-09-2017, the Trial Court, without any application of

         mine, framed charges against M/s JMDS Nordon, Canada,

         through its authorized representative, Vinay Prakash Singh,

         s/o (L) Sh. J.P. Singh, F-1, Deepali Apt, B-Block, Ramprastha

         Colony, Ghaziabad- 201011.


  (b-2) It has been submitted by the learned senior counsel that the

         question of mens rea cannot be attributed to a juristic person

         and to establish a case of cheating against the juristic person,

         the prosecution ought to have established mens rea on the

         alter ego of the company i.e., the personal group of persons

         that guide the business of the company and whose actions

         would be imputed to the company. It has also been submitted

         that in terms of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme

         Court, charges ought to have been framed against the

         individuals responsible for the alleged actions and that the
IPC
does not contemplate any vicarious liability on the part of a

         party who is not charged directly for commission of an offence.

         The learned senior counsel further submitted that in the

         absence of any provisions laid down under the statute, a

         Director/ employee of a company cannot be held to be

         vicariously liable for an offence committed by the company

         itself.


Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                   Contd.../-
                                        [17]



                   In support of his contentions, the learned senior

         counsel cited the following case laws:-


     (i) (2024) SCC OnLine SC 2995 "HDFC Bank Ltd. Vs. State
         Bank of Bihar & ors." wherein it has been held as under:-

         "20.   For bringing out the offence under the ambit of section 420 of
                the Penal Code, 1860, the first information report must
                disclose the following ingredients:
                (a) That the appellant-bank had induced anyone since
                    inception;
                (b) That the said inducement was fraudulent or dishonest; and
                (c) That mens rea existed at the time of such inducement."
        "21.    The appellant-bank is a juristic person and as such, a question
                of mens rea does not arise. However, even reading the first
                information report and the complaint at their face value, there
                is nothing to show that the appellant-bank or its staff members
                had dishonestly induced someone deceived to deliver any
                property to any person, and that the mens rea existed at the
                time of such inducement. As such, the ingredients to attract the
                offence under section 420 of the Penal Code, 1860 would not
                be available."

     (ii) (2015) 4 SCC 609 "Sunil Bharti Mittal Vs. Central Bureau
         of Investigation" wherein it has been held as under:-
         "39. In Iridium India , the aforesaid question fell directly for
              consideration, namely, whether a company could be
              prosecuted for an offence which requires mens rea and
              discussed this aspect at length, taking note of the law that
              prevails in America and England on this issue. For our benefit,
              we will reproduce paras 59-64 herein: (SCC pp. 98-100)
                "59. The courts in England have emphatically rejected the
                     notion that a body corporate could not commit a criminal
                     offence which was an outcome of an act of will needing a
                     particular state of mind. The aforesaid notion has been
                     rejected by adopting the doctrine of attribution and
                     imputation. In other words, the criminal intent of the 'alter
                     ego' of the company/body corporate i.e. the person or
                     group of persons that guide the business of the company,
                     would be imputed to the corporation.


Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                             Contd.../-
                                       [18]



              "60. It may be appropriate at this stage to notice the
                   observations made by MacNaghten, J. in Director of Public
                   Prosecutions v. Kent and Sussex Contractors Ltd. : (KB p.
                   156)
                       A body corporate is a "person" to whom, amongst the
                       various attributes it may have, there should be
                       imputed the attribute of a mind capable of knowing
                       and forming an intention--indeed it is much too late in
                       the day to suggest the contrary. It can only know or
                       form an intention through its human agents, but
                       circumstances may be such that the knowledge of the
                       agent must be imputed to the body corporate. Counsel
                       for the respondents says that, although a body
                       corporate may be capable of having an intention, it is
                       not capable of having a criminal intention. In this
                       particular case the intention was the intention to
                       deceive. If, as in this case, the responsible agent of a
                       body corporate puts forward a document knowing it to
                       be false and intending that it should deceive, I
                       apprehend, according to the authorities that Viscount
                       Caldecote, L.C.J., has cited, his knowledge and
                       intention must be imputed to the body corporate."
             "61. The principle has been reiterated by Lord Denning in Bolton
                  (H.L.)(Engg.) Co. Ltd. v. T.J. Graham & Sons Ltd. in the
                  following words: (QB p. 172)
                         A company may in many ways be likened to a human
                    body. They have a brain and a nerve centre which
                    controls what they do. They also have hands which hold
                    the tools and act in accordance with directions from the
                    centre. Some of the people in the company are mere
                    servants and agents who are nothing more than hands to
                    do the work and cannot be said to represent the mind or
                    will. Others are Directors and managers who represent
                    the directing mind and will of the company, and control
                    what they do. The state of mind of these managers is the
                    state of mind of the company and is treated by the law as
                    such. So you will find that in cases where the law requires
                    personal fault as a condition of liability in tort, the fault of
                    the manager will be the personal fault of the company.
                    That is made clear in Lord Haldane's speech in Lennard's
                    Carrying Co. Ltd. v. Asiatic Petroleum Co. Ltd. (AC at pp.
                    713 & 714). So also in the criminal law, in cases where the
                    law requires a guilty mind as a condition of a criminal
                    offence, the guilty mind of the Directors or the managers
                    will render the company themselves guilty."


Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                               Contd.../-
                                     [19]



             "62. The aforesaid principle has been firmly established in
                  England since the decision of the House of Lords in Tesco
                  Supermarkets Ltd. v. Nattrass. In stating the principle of
                  corporate liability for criminal offences, Lord Reid made
                  the following statement of law: (AC p. 170 E-G)
                          'I must start by considering the nature of the
                     personality which by a fiction the law attributes to a
                     corporation. A living person has a mind which can have
                     knowledge or intention or be negligent and he has
                     hands to carry out his intentions. A corporation has
                     none of these: it must act through living persons,
                     though not always one or the same person. Then the
                     person who acts is not speaking or acting for the
                     company. He is acting as the company and his mind
                     which directs his acts is the mind of the company. There
                     is no question of the company being vicariously liable.
                     He is not acting as a servant, representative, agent or
                     delegate. He is an embodiment of the company or, one
                     could say, he hears and speaks through the persona of
                     the company, within his appropriate sphere, and his
                     mind is the mind of the company. If it is a guilty mind
                     then that guilt is the guilt of the company. It must be a
                     question of law whether, once the facts have been
                     ascertained, a person in doing particular things is to be
                     regarded as the company or merely as the company's
                     servant or agent. In that case any liability of the
                     company can only be a statutory or vicarious liability."
             "63. From the above it becomes evident that a corporation is
                  virtually in the same position as any individual and may be
                  convicted of common law as well as statutory offences
                  including those requiring mens rea. The criminal liability of
                  a corporation would arise when an offence is committed in
                  relation to the business of the corporation by a person or
                  body of persons in control of its affairs. In such
                  circumstances, it would be necessary to ascertain that the
                  degree and control of the person or body of persons is so
                  intense that a corporation may be said to think and act
                  through the person or the body of persons. The position of
                  law on this issue in Canada is almost the same. Mens rea
                  is attributed to corporations on the principle of 'alter ego'
                  of the company."
             "64. So far as India is concerned, the legal position has been
                  clearly stated by the Constitution Bench judgment of this
                  Court in Standard Chartered Bank v. Directorate of
                  Enforcement. On a detailed consideration of the entire


Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                          Contd.../-
                                        [20]



                     body of case laws in this country as well as other
                     jurisdictions, it has been observed as follows: (SCC p. 541,
                     para 6)
                    '6. There is no dispute that a company is liable to be
                         prosecuted and punished for criminal offences.
                         Although there are earlier authorities to the effect that
                         corporations cannot commit a crime, the generally
                         accepted modern rule is that except for such crimes as
                         a corporation is held incapable of committing by reason
                         of the fact that they involve personal malicious intent, a
                         corporation may be subject to indictment or other
                         criminal process, although the criminal act is committed
                         through its agents.'"
        "40. It is abundantly clear from the above that the principle which is
             laid down is to the effect that the criminal intent of the "alter ego"
             of the company, that is the personal group of persons that guide
             the business of the company, would be imputed to the
             company/corporation. The legal proposition that is laid down in
             the aforesaid judgment in Iridium India case is that if the person
             or group of persons who control the affairs of the company
             commit an offence with a criminal intent, their criminality can be
             imputed to the company as well as they are "alter ego" of the
             company.
        (iii)   Circumstances when Director/person in charge of the affairs of
                the company can also be prosecuted, when the company is an
                accused person
        "42. No doubt, a corporate entity is an artificial person which acts
             through its officers, Directors, Managing Director, Chairman, etc.
             If such a company commits an offence involving mens rea, it
             would normally be the intent and action of that individual who
             would act on behalf of the company. It would be more so, when
             the criminal act is that of conspiracy. However, at the same time,
             it is the cardinal principle of criminal jurisprudence that there is
             no vicarious liability unless the statute specifically provides so."
       "43. Thus, an individual who has perpetrated the commission of an
            offence on behalf of a company can be made an accused, along
            with the company, if there is sufficient evidence of his active role
            coupled with criminal intent. Second situation in which he can be
            implicated is in those cases where the statutory regime itself
            attracts the doctrine of vicarious liability, by specifically
            incorporating such a provision."
       "44. When the company is the offender, vicarious liability of the
            Directors cannot be imputed automatically, in the absence of any



Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                              Contd.../-
                                       [21]



            statutory provision to this effect. One such example is
Section 141
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881. In Aneeta Hada , the
            Court noted that if a group of persons that guide the business of
            the company have the criminal intent, that would be imputed to
            the body corporate and it is in this backdrop,
Section 141
of the
            Negotiable Instruments Act has to be understood. Such a position
            is, therefore, because of statutory intendment making it a
            deeming fiction. Here also, the principle of "alter ego", was
            applied only in one direction, namely, where a group of persons
            that guide the business had criminal intent, that is to be imputed
            to the body corporate and not the vice versa. Otherwise, there has
            to be a specific act attributed to the Director or any other person
            allegedly in control and management of the company, to the effect
            that such a person was responsible for the acts committed by or
            on behalf of the company."

    (iii) (2008) 5 SCC 662 "S.K. Alagh Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh
         & ors." wherein it has been held as under:-

         "16. The Penal Code, save and except some provisions specifically
              providing therefor, does not contemplate any vicarious liability
              on the part of a party who is not charged directly for
              commission of an offence."
         "19. As, admittedly, drafts were drawn in the name of the Company,
              even if the appellant was its Managing Director, he cannot be
              said to have committed an offence under Section 406 of the
              Penal Code. If and when a statute contemplates creation of such
              a legal fiction, it provides specifically therefor. In absence of any
              provision laid down under the statute, a Director of a Company
              or an employee cannot be held to be vicariously liable for any
              offence committed by the Company itself. (See Sabitha
              Ramamurthy v. R.B.S. Channabasavaradhya [(2006) 10 SCC
              581: (2007) 1 SCC (Cri) 621] .)"

  (c-1) It has been submitted on behalf of the petitioner that the

         prosecution has not alleged any criminal conspiracy against

         the petitioner (Accused No. 6) in the charge-sheet nor has any

         charge under
Section 120-B
IPC been framed against the

         petitioner. According to the learned senior counsel, this

         omission is not incidental but a clear acknowledgement that no

Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                              Contd.../-
                                   [22]



         material exists to support such a charge. The learner senior

         counsel submitted that in the absence of any allegation of

         conspiracy, it is legally inconceivable that the petitioner

         (Accused No. 6), a juristic person, could engage in fraudulent

         or dishonest inducement and that cheating under
Section 420
IPC inherently requires a mental element, i.e., mens rea, which

         must be demonstrated through specific acts or intent of natural

         persons controlling the company.


  (d-1) It has been submitted on behalf of the petitioner that the

         prosecution has miserably failed to establish even prima facie

         suspicion against Accused No. 6 and that the charges along

         with its documents are not sufficient to create even a prima

         facie suspicion against the petitioner. It has also been

         submitted that there is no material whatsoever to create even

         a strong suspicion in the mind of the court that the petitioner

         (Accused No. 6) has committed the offence of cheating and as

         such, the impugned judgment and order rendered by the Trial

         Court is not sustainable in view of the settled legal principle of

         law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court. In support of his

         contentions, the learned senior counsel relied on the following

         case laws:-




Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                    Contd.../-
                                         [23]



    (i)   (1979) 3 SCC 4 "Union of India Vs. Prafulla Kumar Samal

          & anr." wherein it has been held as under:-
     "7. Section 227 of the Code runs thus:
                "If, upon consideration of the record of the case and the
                documents submitted therewith, and after hearing the
                submissions of the accused and the prosecution in this behalf,
                the Judge considers that there is not sufficient ground for
                proceeding against the accused, he shall discharge the
                accused and record his reasons for so doing."
                The words "not sufficient ground for proceeding against the
          accused" clearly show that the Judge is not a mere post office to
          frame the charge at the behest of the prosecution, but has to exercise
          his judicial mind to the facts of the case in order to determine
          whether a case for trial has been made out by the prosecution. In
          assessing this fact, it is not necessary for the court to enter into the
          pros and cons of the matter or into a weighing and balancing of
          evidence and probabilities which is really his function after the trial
          starts. At the stage of Section 227, the Judge has merely to sift the
          evidence in order to find out whether or not there is sufficient ground
          for proceeding against the accused. The sufficiency of ground would
          take within its fold the nature of the evidence recorded by the police
          or the documents produced before the court which ex facie disclose
          that there are suspicious circumstances against the accused so as
          to frame a charge against him."
    "8.   The scope of Section 227 of the Code was considered by a recent
          decision of this Court in the case of State of Bihar v. Ramesh
          Singh where Untwalia, J., speaking for the Court observed as
          follows:
                "Strong suspicion against the accused, if the matter remains in
                the region of suspicion, cannot take the place of proof of his
                guilt at the conclusion of the trial. But at the initial stage if there
                is a strong suspicion which leads the Court to think that there
                is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an
                offence then it is not open to the Court to say that there is no
                sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. The
                presumption of the guilt of the accused which is to be drawn at
                the initial stage is not in the sense of the law governing the trial
                of criminal cases in France where the accused is presumed to
                be guilty unless the contrary is proved. But it is only for the
                purpose of deciding prima facie whether the Court should
                proceed with the trial or not. If the evidence which the
                Prosecutor proposes to adduce to prove the guilt of the



Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                                  Contd.../-
                                        [24]



                accused even if fully accepted before it is challenged in cross-
                examination or rebutted by the defence evidence, if any, cannot
                show that the accused committed the offence, then there will
                be no sufficient ground for proceeding with the trial."
                This Court has thus held that whereas strong suspicion may
          not take the place of the proof at the trial stage, yet it may be
          sufficient for the satisfaction of the Sessions Judge in order to frame
          a charge against the accused. Even under the Code of 1898 this Court
          has held that a committing Magistrate had ample powers to weigh
          the evidence for the limited purpose of finding out whether or not a
          case of commitment to the Sessions Judge has been made out."
    "9.   In the case of K.P. Raghavan v. M.H. Abbas this Court observed as
          follows:
                "No doubt a Magistrate enquiring into a case under
Section 209
CrPC is not to act as a mere Post Office, and has to come to a
                 conclusion whether the case before him is fit for commitment
                 of the accused to the Court of Session."
                To the same effect is the later decision of this Court in the case
          of Almohan Das v. State of West Bengal where Shah, J., speaking for
          the Court observed as follows:
                "A Magistrate holding an enquiry is not intended to act merely
                 as a recording machine. He is entitled to sift and weigh the
                 materials on record, but only for seeing whether there is
                 sufficient evidence for commitment, and not whether there is
                 sufficient evidence for conviction. If there is no prima facie
                 evidence or the evidence is totally unworthy of credit, it is his
                 duty to discharge the accused: if there is some evidence on
                 which a conviction may reasonably be based, he must commit
                 the case."
               In the aforesaid case this Court was considering the scope and
          ambit of Section 209 of the Code of 1898."
    "10. Thus, on a consideration of the authorities mentioned above, the
         following principles emerge:
          (1)   That the Judge while considering the question of framing the
                charges under Section 227 of the Code has the undoubted
                power to sift and weigh the evidence for the limited purpose of
                finding out whether or not a prima facie case against the
                accused has been made out.
          (2)   Where the materials placed before the Court disclose grave
                suspicion against the accused which has not been properly
                explained the Court will be fully justified in framing a charge
                and proceeding with the trial.


Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                             Contd.../-
                                         [25]



           (3)   The test to determine a prima facie case would naturally depend
                 upon the facts of each case and it is difficult to lay down a rule
                 of universal application. By and large however if two views are
                 equally possible and the Judge is satisfied that the evidence
                 produced before him while giving rise to some suspicion but
                 not grave suspicion against the accused, he will be fully within
                 his right to discharge the accused.
           (4)   That in exercising his jurisdiction under Section 227 of the Code
                 the Judge which under the present Code is a senior and
                 experienced court cannot act merely as a Post Office or a
                 mouthpiece of the prosecution, but has to consider the broad
                 probabilities of the case, the total effect of the evidence and the
                 documents produced before the Court, any basic infirmities
                 appearing in the case and so on. This however does not mean
                 that the Judge should make a roving enquiry into the pros and
                 cons of the matter and weigh the evidence as if he was
                 conducting a trial."

    (ii)   (2019) 16 SCC 547 "Dipakbhai Jagdishchandra Patel Vs.

           State of Gujarat & anr." wherein it has been held as under:-

           "Law relating to framing of charge and discharge
    "15. We may profitably, in this regard, refer to the judgment of this Court
         in State of Bihar v. Ramesh Singh wherein this Court has laid down
         the principles relating to framing of charge and discharge as follows:
         (SCC pp. 41-42, para 4)
           "4.   ... Reading Sections 227 and 228 together in juxtaposition, as
                 they have got to be, it would be clear that at the beginning and
                 the initial stage of the trial the truth, veracity and effect of the
                 evidence which the prosecutor proposes to adduce are not to
                 be meticulously judged. Nor is any weight to be attached to the
                 probable defence of the accused. It is not obligatory for the
                 Judge at that stage of the trial to consider in any detail and
                 weigh in a sensitive balance whether the facts, if proved, would
                 be incompatible with the innocence of the accused or not. The
                 standard of test and judgment which is to be finally applied
                 before recording a finding regarding the guilt or otherwise of
                 the accused is not exactly to be applied at the stage of deciding
                 the matter under Section 227 or Section 228 of the Code. At that
                 stage the court is not to see whether there is sufficient ground
                 for conviction of the accused or whether the trial is sure to end
                 in his conviction. Strong suspicion against the accused, if the
                 matter remains in the region of suspicion, cannot take the place
                 of proof of his guilt at the conclusion of the trial. But at the


Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                                Contd.../-
                                        [26]



               initial stage if there is a strong suspicion which leads the Court
               to think that there is ground for presuming that the accused
               has committed an offence then it is not open to the Court to say
               that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding against the
               accused. The presumption of the guilt of the accused which is
               to be drawn at the initial stage is not in the sense of the law
               governing the trial of criminal cases in France where the
               accused is presumed to be guilty unless the contrary is proved.
               But it is only for the purpose of deciding prima facie whether
               the court should proceed with the trial or not. If the evidence
               which the prosecutor proposes to adduce to prove the guilt of
               the accused even if fully accepted before it is challenged in
               cross-examination or rebutted by the defence evidence, if any,
               cannot show that the accused committed the offence, then
               there will be no sufficient ground for proceeding with the trial.
               ... If the scales of pan as to the guilt or innocence of the
               accused are something like even, at the conclusion of the trial,
               then, on the theory of benefit of doubt the case is to end in his
               acquittal. But if, on the other hand, it is so at the initial stage of
               making an order under Section 227 or Section 228, then in such
               a situation ordinarily and generally the order which will have to
               be made will be one under Section 228 and not under Section
               227."
    "16. In Union of India v. Prafulla Kumar Samal, after survey of case law,
         this is what the Court has laid down: (SCC p. 9, para 10)
         "10. Thus, on a consideration of the authorities mentioned above,
              the following principles emerge:
               (1) That the Judge while considering the question of framing
                   the charges under Section 227 of the Code has the
                   undoubted power to sift and weigh the evidence for the
                   limited purpose of finding out whether or not a prima facie
                   case against the accused has been made out.
               (2) Where the materials placed before the Court disclose
                   grave suspicion against the accused which has not been
                   properly explained the Court will be fully justified in
                   framing a charge and proceeding with the trial.
               (3) The test to determine a prima facie case would naturally
                   depend upon the facts of each case and it is difficult to lay
                   down a rule of universal application. By and large however
                   if two views are equally possible and the Judge is satisfied
                   that the evidence produced before him while giving rise to
                   some suspicion but not grave suspicion against the
                   accused, he will be fully within his right to discharge the
                   accused.


Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                                Contd.../-
                                       [27]



               (4) That in exercising his jurisdiction under Section 227 of the
                   Code the Judge which under the present Code is a senior
                   and experienced court cannot act merely as a post office
                   or a mouthpiece of the prosecution, but has to consider the
                   broad probabilities of the case, the total effect of the
                   evidence and the documents produced before the Court,
                   any basic infirmities appearing in the case and so on. This
                   however does not mean that the Judge should make a
                   roving enquiry into the pros and cons of the matter and
                   weigh the evidence as if he was conducting a trial."
      "17. It is the case of the State that the appellant had knowledge that
           the notes were counterfeit and fake notes and was in conscious
           possession of the fake notes for 15 days. For framing charges,
           what is required is prima facie satisfaction. Offence relating to
           counterfeit notes is a grave offence and not to be viewed lightly."
      "18. In the statement by the first accused, he has stated that he had
           come to Ahmedabad 15 days earlier. At that time, he had told the
           appellant that the fake notes are to be sold at cheap price and at
           present he may keep those notes with him. He further states that
           he had brought these notes from the residence of the appellant
           and that he had been caught while he was selling the notes at
           cheap price."
      "19. In the first statement given by the appellant dated 11-4-1996 relied
           upon by the State, the appellant is credited with knowledge of the
           fact that the bag containing counterfeit notes was left by the first
           accused at the appellant's residence and they were to be sold at
           cheap price and it was kept at his residence for some days."
      "20. Subsequently, his statement was again recorded on 10-7-1996.
           Therein, he inter alia states that the first accused told him that the
           bag contains files relating to land deals and it contained
           valuables."
      "21. In further questioning on 30-8-1996, he inter alia states that
           because of his acquaintance with Ravi, he became acquainted
           with the first accused and that he had left the bag at his residence
           saying that the bag contained important documents."
      "22. These are the materials, in short, which were relied on by the State
           to sustain the order framing the charge against the appellant. That
           is to say, the statements given by the appellant under Section 161
           and the statement also given by the co-accused."
      "23. At the stage of framing the charge in accordance with the
           principles which have been laid down by this Court, what the
           court is expected to do is, it does not act as a mere post office.
           The court must indeed sift the material before it. The material to


Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                            Contd.../-
                                      [28]



            be sifted would be the material which is produced and relied upon
            by the prosecution. The sifting is not to be meticulous in the
            sense that the court dons the mantle of the trial Judge hearing
            arguments after the entire evidence has been adduced after a full-
            fledged trial and the question is not whether the prosecution has
            made out the case for the conviction of the accused. All that is
            required is, the court must be satisfied that with the materials
            available, a case is made out for the accused to stand trial. A
            strong suspicion suffices. However, a strong suspicion must be
            founded on some material. The material must be such as can be
            translated into evidence at the stage of trial. The strong suspicion
            cannot be the pure subjective satisfaction based on the moral
            notions of the Judge that here is a case where it is possible that
            the accused has committed the offence. Strong suspicion must
            be the suspicion which is premised on some material which
            commends itself to the court as sufficient to entertain the prima
            facie view that the accused has committed the offence."

    (iii) (2022) 9 SCC 577 "Kanchan Kumar Vs. State of Bihar"
         wherein it has been held as under:-

    "17. The first objection pertains to the inclusion of an amount of
         Rs 55,000, recorded as the balance amount in the appellant's bank
         account during the check period, and accordingly counted as an
         expenditure in the charge-sheet. However, the bank passbook filed
         by the appellant, which was available to the investigating officer and
         the Special Judge (Vigilance), evidently records a balance amount of
         only Rs 11,998 during the check period. The difference in the figures
         was not explained by the prosecution. Accordingly, the Special
         Judge (Vigilance) and the High Court failed to reconcile such a
         simple and straightforward inconsistency in the prosecution's
         evidence. We are of the opinion that only an amount of Rs 11,998,
         recorded in the appellant's bank passbook during the check period
         as the balance amount, is validly admissible as expenditure under
         this head."
    "18. The second objection relates to the inclusion of an amount of Rs
         53,467 as expenditure towards repayment of the loan from BSFC.
         However, the amount repaid towards loan instalments was already
         deducted from the appellant's gross salary, and the deducted figure
         was recorded as the total disposable income with the appellant
         during the check period. Hence, the loan repayment cannot be
         separately counted as an expenditure yet again. This is a glaring
         mistake. The Special Judge (Vigilance) as well as the High Court did
         not consider this objection on the ground that a roving inquiry is not
         permissible at the stage of discharge."



Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                           Contd.../-
                                       [29]



    "19. The third objection relates to the inclusion of Rs 1,58,562 as the value
         of the articles found during a search conducted in the appellant's
         house on 21-2-2000, twelve years after the check period of 1974 to
         1988. There is nothing to indicate, even prima facie, that these
         articles found during the search in the year 2000 were acquired
         during the check period. In the absence of any material to link these
         articles as having been acquired during the check period, it is
         impermissible to include their value in the expenditure. We are
         therefore of the opinion that the appellant's objection about inclusion
         of this amount in the list of expenditure is fully justified.
         Unfortunately, even this objection, which did not require much
         scrutiny of the material on record, was not considered by the Special
         Judge (Vigilance) or the High Court."
    "21. The conclusions that we have drawn are based on materials placed
          before us, which are part of the case record. This is the same record
          that was available with the Special Judge (Vigilance) when the
          application under Section 227CrPC was taken up. Despite that, the
          Special Judge (Vigilance) dismissed the discharge application on the
          simple ground that a roving inquiry is not permitted at the stage of
          discharge. What we have undertaken is not a roving inquiry, but a
          simple and necessary inquiry for a proper adjudication of an
          application for discharge. The Special Judge (Vigilance) was bound
          to conduct a similar inquiry for coming to a conclusion that a prima
          facie case is made out for the appellant to stand trial. Unfortunately,
          the High Court committed the same mistake as that of the Special
          Judge (Vigilance)."
    "23. For the reasons stated above, we allow the criminal appeal arising
         out of SLP (Crl) No. 9601 of 2016, and set aside the judgment and
         order of the High Court of Patna in Kanchan Kumar v. State of
         Bihar [Kanchan Kumar v. State of Bihar, 2016 SCC OnLine Pat 10208]
         dated 5-10-2016, and that of the Court of Special Judge (Vigilance),
         Patna in Special Case No. 09 of 2000, dated 28-3-2016, and discharge
         the appellant."

  (e-1) It has been submitted by the learned senior counsel that the

         unequivocal findings of a coordinate bench of this Court in

         Criminal Revision Petition No. 19 of 2017, wherein Accused

         No. 1 was discharged from criminal proceedings, are directly

         relevant and binding. It has been submitted that in the said

         judgment & order rendered by a coordinate bench of this court,

Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                            Contd.../-
                                  [30]



         it has been held that the CBI itself admitted that there is

         nothing which has been received or taken by the first accused

         in the whole transaction and that as there is no allegation that

         Theatronics Equinox 100 SAD of M/s MDS Nordon was

         purchased at a price higher than the market rate, there is no

         issue of wrongful gain by the petitioner or wrongful loss by

         RIMS, etc. Taken all together, these findings conclusively

         established that the essential ingredients of the offence of

         cheating, including dishonest inducement, wrongful gain and

         mens rea are entirely absent in the present case. The learned

         senior counsel submitted that the case of the petitioner

         (Accused No. 6) stands on even a stronger legal footing than

         that of the Accused No. 1. The learned senior counsel further

         submitted that it is a settled principle of law that a company

         cannot be prosecuted for offence involving mens rea in the

         absence of specific allegations against its Directors or those

         who are in control of its affairs. In the present case, the

         admitted position is that there is no mental element, no

         dishonest or fraudulent intent attributed to any Director or

         Officer of the petitioner company and as such, this creates a

         clear legal bar to proceed against the company for offence of

         cheating under
Section 420
IPC.



Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                   Contd.../-
                                   [31]



  (e-2) It has been submitted on behalf of the petitioner that it is a

          well-settled principle of law that the decision of a coordinate

          bench is binding on subsequent benches deciding the same

          or similar issues, unless the latter bench is of the considered

          view that the matter warrants reconsideration by a larger

          bench. Mere pendency of the Special Leave to Appeal (Cril.)

          No. 10109 of 2023 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court against

          the judgment and order passed by the coordinate bench of this

          court does not dilute the binding nature of the coordinate

          bench's findings, especially in the absence of any stay of the

          judgment and that the prosecution remains bound by the

          conclusion drawn therein. Accordingly, there exists no

          compelling reason for this court to depart from the view already

          taken by the coordinate bench of this court. It has been

          submitted that the case of the petitioner stands on an entirely

          independent and stronger footing, both factually and legally,

          and deserves to be considered on its own merit. In support of

          his contentions, the learned senior counsel cited the following

          case laws:-

    (i)   (2010) 13 SCC 336 "Sant Lal Gupta & ors. Vs. Modern
          Cooperative Group Housing Society Ltd. & ors." wherein it
          has been held as under:-




Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                    Contd.../-
                                       [32]



    "17. A coordinate Bench cannot comment upon the discretion exercised
         or judgment rendered by another coordinate Bench of the same
         court. The rule of precedent is binding for the reason that there is a
         desire to secure uniformity and certainty in law. Thus, in judicial
         administration precedents which enunciate the rules of law form the
         foundation of the administration of justice under our system.
         Therefore, it has always been insisted that the decision of a
         coordinate Bench must be followed. (Vide Tribhovandas
         Purshottamdas Thakkar v. Ratilal Motilal Patel , Sub-Committee of
         Judicial Accountability v. Union of India and State of
         Tripura v. Tripura Bar Assn."

    (ii) (2003) 5 SCC 480 "Rajasthan Public Service Commission
         & anr. Vs. Harish Kumar Purohit & ors." wherein it has been
         held as under:-
    "12. Before parting with the case we would like to point out one disturbing
         feature which has been brought to our notice. On 13-12-2001 a
         Division Bench dismissed an application containing identical
         prayers. Even before the ink was dry on the judgment, by the
         impugned judgment, another Division Bench took a diametrically
         opposite view. It is not that the earlier decision was not brought to
         the notice of the subsequent Division Bench hearing the subsequent
         applications. In fact, a reference has been made by the submissions
         made by the Commission where this decision was highlighted.
         Unfortunately, the Division Bench hearing the subsequent
         applications did not even refer to the conclusions arrived at by the
         earlier Division Bench. The earlier decision of the Division Bench is
         binding on a Bench of coordinate strength. If the Bench hearing
         matters subsequently entertains any doubt about the correctness of
         the earlier decision, the only course open to it is to refer the matter
         to a larger Bench."
    "13. The position was highlighted by this Court in a three-Judge Bench
         decision in State of Tripura v. Tripura Bar Assn. in the following
         words : (SCC p. 639, para 4)
         "4.   We are of the view that the Division Bench of the High Court
               which has delivered the impugned judgment being a
               coordinate Bench could not have taken a view different from
               that taken by the earlier Division Bench of the High Court in the
               case of Durgadas Purkayastha v. Hon'ble Gauhati High Court.
               If the latter Bench wanted to take a view different than that
               taken by the earlier Bench, the proper course for them would
               have been to refer the matter to a larger Bench. We have
               perused the reasons given by the learned Judges for not


Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                           Contd.../-
                                      [33]



               referring the matter to a larger Bench. We are not satisfied that
               the said reasons justified their deciding the matter and not
               referring it to the larger Bench. In the circumstances, we are
               unable to uphold the impugned judgment of the High Court
               insofar as it relates to the matter of inter se seniority of the
               Judicial Officers impleaded as respondents in the writ petition.
               The impugned judgment of the High Court insofar as it relates
               to the matter of seniority of the respondent Judicial Officers is
               set aside. The appeals are disposed of accordingly. No costs."
    "14. In the instant case, the position is still worse. The latter Bench did
         not even indicate as to why it was not following the earlier Bench
         judgment though brought to its notice. Judicial propriety and
         decorum warranted such a course indicated above to be adopted."

    (iii) (2024) 3 SCC 224 "Mary Pushpam Vs. Relvi Curusumary &
         ors." wherein it has been held as under:-

    "19. The doctrine of merger is a common law doctrine that is rooted in the
         idea of maintenance of the decorum of hierarchy of courts and
         tribunals. The doctrine is based on the simple reasoning that
         there cannot be, at the same time, more than one operative order
         governing the same subject-matter. The same was aptly summed
         up by this Court when it described the said doctrine
         in Kunhayammed v. State of Kerala : (SCC p. 383, para 44)
         "44. ... (i) Where an appeal or revision is provided against an order
              passed by a court, tribunal or any other authority before
              superior forum and such superior forum modifies, reverses or
              affirms the decision put in issue before it, the decision by the
              subordinate forum merges in the decision by the superior
              forum and it is the latter which subsists, remains operative and
              is capable of enforcement in the eye of the law."
    "20. The legal position on coordinate Benches has further been
         elaborated by this Court in State of Punjab v. Devans Modern
         Breweries Ltd. : (SCC p. 157, paras 339-340)
        "339. Judicial discipline envisages that a coordinate Bench follow
              the decision of an earlier coordinate Bench. If a coordinate
              Bench does not agree with the principles of law enunciated by
              another Bench, the matter may be referred only to a larger
              Bench.
                                            ***
        "340. In Halsbury's Laws of England (4th Edn.), Vol. 26 at pp. 297-98,
              para 578, it is stated:




Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                           Contd.../-
                                      [34]



                   'A decision is given per incuriam when the court has acted
                    in ignorance of a previous decision of its own or of a court
                    of coordinate jurisdiction which covered the case before
                    it, in which case it must decide which case to follow.' "

[11]      Mr. W. Darakishwor, learned senior panel counsel appearing

for the respondent No. 1 (CBI) submitted that there was collision

between the RIMS officials and the petitioner company through its Indian

agent, i.e., Kirloskar Theratronics. It has been submitted that Dr. Th.

Tomcha Singh, Professor and Head of Department of Radiotherapy,

RIMS, Imphal (Accused No. 2) proposed for purchase of telecobalt

machine and submitted the requisite technical specifications under a

letter dated 29-12-2006. Thereafter, the said Accused No. 2 again

resubmitted the revised technical specifications for the proposed

telecobalt machine under a letter dated 09-02-2007 with a note that the

equipment with specified features is available with M.S. Kirloskar

Theratronics only (Indian Agent of the petitioner company). It has been

submitted that the subsequent technical specifications were nothing but

a general features of telecobalt equipment manufactured by the

petitioner company and that those specifications were incorporated in

the tender notice and as such, the tender specifications were tailor-made

only to suit the petitioner company.


[12]      The learned senior panel counsel appearing for the CBI

submitted that all the formalities for purchase of equipment were

completed hurriedly by violating the provisions of General Financial

 Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                          Contd.../-
                                    [35]



Rules (GFR) even though there was no exigency for procuring the

machine and even when no room for keeping the said machine was even

ready. It has also been submitted by the learned senior panel counsel

that all the tender formalities were completed by M/s Kirloskar

Theratronics (Accused No. 5), which was an authorized agent of the

petitioner company, and that the sealed tender quotation on behalf of the

petitioner company was submitted to RIMS by self-courier as managed

by Mr. Shahid Hussain (Accused No. 4), which was the then Regional

Manager of M/s Kirloskar Theratronics (P) Ltd. in the bidding process of

the tender by visiting RIMS, Imphal.


[13]      It has also been submitted on behalf of the CBI that copies of

tender notice with enclosures for supply of telecobalt machine dated

01-03-2007 was sent to the Indian agent of the petitioner company by a

staff of RIMS on the instruction of the then Director, RIMS (Accused

No. 1) by courier against the instruction of the tender notice. It has been

submitted that the Accused No. 1, through the said dealing Assistant of

RIMS, violated the relevant provisions of the GFR when the NIT was

issued for supply of telecobalt machine to RIMS in order to favour M/s

Kirloskar Theratronics (Accused No. 5).


[14]      Mr. W. Darakishwor, learned senior panel counsel appearing

for the CBI submitted that after quotation of the tender, the total of five

companies viz., (i) M/s Alliance Biomedica Pvt. Ltd., Chennai, (ii) M/s

 Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                    Contd.../-
                                    [36]



Syscop Impex Pvt. Ltd., Kolkata, (iii) M/s Mehta Agencies Ltd., Kolkata,

(iv) M/s Panacea Medical Technologies Pvt. Ltd. and (v) M/s MDS

Nordon, Canada, submitted their tender bids and all of them offered the

required machine by quoting different amounts. It has also been

submitted that M/s Panacea Private Limited proposed to supply the

telecobalt machine quoting a price of Rs. 1.59 crore inclusive of all taxes,

almost 1 crore less than the quoted amount of Rs. 2.47 crores by the

petitioner company excluding taxes. The learned senior panel counsel

further submitted that when M/s Panacea Medical Technologies Pvt. Ltd,

informed the Director, RIMS (Accused No. 1) that their machine complies

all the requisite technical specifications, the Accused No. 1 wrote letters

to various authorities including BARC in between May and June, 2007

to inquire about the technical compatibility of the machine to be supplied

by the said M/s Panacea Medical Technologies Pvt. Ltd. The Associate

Director, Division of Remote Handling & Robotics, Bhabha Atomic

Research Centre      (BARC) categorically stated that it is possible to

implement Isocentric at 800 cm, the unit has 250 RMM output source

and collision detection device was available, the Accused No. 1 made

no further correspondence in that regard and issued the supply order in

favour of the petitioner company for supply of the said telecobalt

machine by ignoring the low price quoted by the M/s Panacea Medical

Technologies Pvt. Ltd. representing BARC.



 Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                     Contd.../-
                                   [37]



[15]      The learned senior panel counsel appearing for the CBI also

submitted that Mr. Shahid Hussain, the then Regional Manager and

DGM (Sales) of Kirloskar Technologies Pvt. Ltd., was camping in Imphal

and had visited four times and was instrumental in securing the tender

in favour of the petitioner company. The learned counsel further

submitted that M/s Kirloskar Technologies Pvt. Ltd. (Accused No. 5) had

benefited from the award of the tender to the petitioner company

(Accused No. 6) by way of commission from the petitioner company.


[16]      It has been submitted on behalf of the CBI that Dr. S. Sekharjit

Singh (Accused No. 3) with full knowledge of the equipment lying idle

without installation and commissioning for a long period in RIMS

requested the Director, RIMS to issue a certificate for release of the

remaining 10% payment by certifying that the unit was installed and

commissioned as per LC Payment Clause and advising the United Bank

of India to make payment of 10% from the Letter of Credit (LC) Account

on the basis of the endorsement made by the Accused No. 2 without

physically checking whether the machine was installed properly or not

thereby favouring the petitioner company by abusing his official position.

It has also been submitted that on a joint check conducted in the room

of Radiotherapy, RIMS where the telecobalt machine was placed, it was

found that the machine was installed physically but yet to be

commissioned and as such, in making payment of the remaining 10%


 Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                   Contd.../-
                                     [38]



before the full installation of the machine, the accused officials of RIMS

have abused their official position in order to favour the petitioner

company.


[17]       The learned senior counsel submitted that the petitioner

company has the requisite mens rea from the very inception of the

transaction and that the conduct of its authorized Indian agent clearly

reflects a deliberate and conscious act done with full intent and

knowledge of the petitioner company. It has been submitted that in a

corporate criminal liability, the intent and actions of the authorized agents

are attributable to the company. Therefore, the mala fide intention was

invented in the petitioner company's action right from the beginning

making it liable for attracting offence under
Section 420
of the IPC. The

learned counsel submitted that the pre-planned nature of the act, the

concealment of true facts and the subsequent benefits derived by the

petitioner company demonstrated that this was not a mere omission or

error but a deliberate act with fraudulent knowledge which attracted
Section 420
of the IPC. Thus, there is prima facie case made out against

the petitioner company that the petitioner company might have

committed the offence under
Section 420
IPC which is enough to frame

charge against it.


[18]       It has been strenuously submitted by the learned senior panel

counsel that RIMS was allegedly misled into purchasing the machine

 Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                     Contd.../-
                                     [39]



worth Rs. 1 crore more than the alternate telecobalt machine with same

specifications manufactured by M/s Panacea Limited and that the

petitioner company paid a commission of Rs. 67,81,866/- to its Indian

Agent (Accused No. 5) implying collision and resulting in wrongful gain.

It has also been submitted that RIMS was induced to accept an

overpriced machine based on manipulated tactics by passing more

economically and equally capable product. Thus, there is element of

deception and involvement of selection of costly machine which

suggests their dishonest intention attracting offence under
Section 420
of the IPC.


[19]      The learned senior panel counsel appearing for the CBI

submitted that the learned Special Judge rejected the petition of the

petitioner company file under
Section 227
of the CrPC and framed

charge against the Accused No. 2 after observation of facts on records

minutely with considered view that there was sufficient prima facie or

grave suspicion of the conspiracy hatched between Accused No. 1 and

Accused No. 3, who have misused their official position as public servant

in favouring Accused No. 4, Accused No. 5 and Accused No. 6 in the

award of tender of telecobalt machine, i.e., Theratron Equinox 100 SAD

manufactured by Accused No. 6 costing Rs. 2,34,38,437/- over the

Indian   machine    Bhabhatron-II    manufactured   by   M/s   Panacea

Technologies and costing Rs. 1 crore less and in the process of helping


 Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                  Contd.../-
                                         [40]



Accused No. 5 getting a commission of Rs. 67,81,866/- for supply of a

machine that is still lying idle and yet to be functional in RIMS thereby

depriving the facilities to be provided to the cancer patient for medical

treatment.


[20]        The learned counsel for the CBI cited the following case laws.

       I.   Charge can be framed against the accused when there is
            prima facie grave suspicion from the material on record
            from the charge-sheet.

        (i) (1977) 4 SCC 39 "State of Bihar Vs. Ramesh Singh"
            wherein it has been held as under:-
            "2. When the case was opened in the Court of the Third Additional
                Sessions Judge at Motihari m Sessions Trial 66 of 1975 by the
                Additional Public Prosecutor in accordance with Section 226 of
                the Code, a plea was raised on behalf of the respondent that
                there was not any sufficient ground for proceeding with the trial
                against him and he should be dis- charged in accordance with
                Section 227. The Additional Sessions Judge accepted the plea
                and discharged the accused by his order dated April 30, 1975.
                The State of Bihar -- the appellant in this appeal, went in revision
                before the Patna High Court to assail the order aforesaid of the
                Sessions Court. The High Court by its order dated February 18,
                1976 dismissed the revision. Hence this appeal."
            "4. Under Section 226 of the Code while opening the case for the
                prosecution the Prosecutor has got to describe the charge
                against the accused and state by what evidence he proposes to
                prove the guilt of the accused. Thereafter comes at the initial
                stage the duty of the Court to consider the record of the case
                and the documents submitted therewith and to hear the
                submissions of the accused and the prosecution in that behalf.
                The Judge has to pass thereafter an order either under Section
                227 or Section 228 of the Code. If "the Judge considers that there
                is no sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused, he
                shall discharge the accused and record his reasons for so
                doing", as enjoined by Section 227. If, on the other hand, "the
                Judge is of opinion that there is ground for presuming that the



 Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                             Contd.../-
                                       [41]



             accused has committed an offence which-- ... (b) is exclusively
             triable by the Court, he shall frame in writing a charge against
             the accused", as provided in Section 228. Reading the two
             provisions together in juxtaposition, as they have got to be, it
             would be clear that at the beginning and the initial stage of the
             trial the truth, veracity and effect of the evidence which the
             Prosecutor proposes to adduce are not to be meticulously
             judged. Nor is any weight to be attached to the probable defence
             of the accused. It is not obligatory for the Judge at that stage of
             the trial to consider in any detail and weigh in a sensitive balance
             whether the facts, if proved, would be incompatible with the
             innocence of the accused or not. The standard of test and
             judgment which is to be finally applied before recording a finding
             regarding the guilt or otherwise of the accused is not exactly to
             be applied at the stage of deciding the matter under Section 227
             or Section 228 of the Code. At that stage the Court is not to see
             whether there is sufficient ground for conviction of the accused
             or whether the trial is sure to end in his conviction. Strong
             suspicion against the accused, if the matter remains in the
             region of suspicion, cannot take the place of proof of his guilt at
             the conclusion of the trial. But at the initial stage if there is a
             strong suspicion which leads the Court to think that there is
             ground for presuming that the accused has committed an
             offence then it is not open to the Court to say that there is no
             sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. The
             presumption of the guilt of the accused which is to be drawn at
             the initial stage is not in the sense of the law governing the trial
             of criminal cases in France where the accused is presumed to
             be guilty unless the contrary is proved. But it is only for the
             purpose of deciding prima facie whether the Court should
             proceed with the trial or not. It the evidence which the Prosecutor
             proposes to adduce to prove the guilt of the accused even if fully
             accepted before it is challenged in cross-examination or
             rebutted by the defence evidence, if any, cannot show that the
             accused committed the offence, then there will be no sufficient
             ground for proceeding with the trial. An exhaustive list of the
             circumstances to indicate as to what will lead to one conclusion
             or the other is neither possible nor advisable. We may just
             illustrate the difference of the law by one more example. If the
             scales of pan as to the guilt or innocence of the accused are
             something like even, at the conclusion of the trial, then, on the
             theory of benefit of doubt the case is to end in his acquittal. But
             if, on the other hand, it is so at the initial stage of making an order
             under Section 227 or Section 228, then in such a situation
             ordinarily and generally the order which will have to be made will
             be one under Section 228 and not under Section 227."


Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                               Contd.../-
                                        [42]



         "5. In Nirmaljit Singh Hoon v. State of West Bengal -- Shelat, J.
delivering the judgment on behalf of the majority of the Court
             referred at p. 79 of the report to the earlier decisions of this Court
             in
Chandra Deo Singh v. Prokash Chandra Bose
-- where this
             Court was held to have laid down with reference to the similar
             provisions contained in
Sections 202
and
203
of the Code of
             Criminal Procedure, 1898 "that the test was whether there was
             sufficient ground for proceeding and not whether there was
             sufficient ground for conviction, and observed that where there
             was prima facie evidence, even though the person charged of an
             offence in the complaint might have a defence, the matter had to
             be left to be decided by the appropriate forum at the appropriate
             stage and issue of a process could not be refused". Illustratively,
             Shelat, J., further added "Unless, therefore, the Magistrate finds
             that the evidence led before him is self-contradictory, or
             intrinsically untrustworthy, process cannot be refused if that
             evidence makes out a prima facie case".
(ii) (2024) SCC OnLine SC 3805 "State of Orissa Vs. Pratima
         Behera" wherein it has been held as under:-
"4. The respondent and her husband Sh. Anil Kumar Sethi, thereupon
             moved applications for discharge under Section 239, Cr. P.C.,
             before the learned Special Judge (Vigilance), Balasore. As noted
             earlier, it is the dismissal of the said petition that led to the filing
             of the Criminal Revision before the High Court and ultimately
             leading to impugned judgment. Evidently, the Trial Court found
             that there is a potential prima facie case against the appellant and
             her husband and the same could not be interfered with at the
             nascent stage. The High Court, as per the impugned judgment,
             held that there is no clinching material to show that the appellant
             abetted her husband or made any conspiracy or instigation for
             the alleged acquisition of disproportionate assets. After allowing
             the Revision Petition qua the respondent, the High Court
             observed and held that the impugned judgment should not
             influence the mind of the learned Trial Court in adjudicating the
             trial qua the co-accused Anil Kumar Sethi in accordance with law.
             It is in the said circumstances that the captioned Appeal has been
             preferred."
"9. Before considering the rival contentions on merits in order to
            consider the sustainability or otherwise of the impugned
            judgment, we think it only appropriate to consider certain relevant
            position of law in relation to certain aspects involved in the case
            on hand. We will firstly consider the scope of Section 239, Cr. P.C.
            In the decision in
R.S. Nayak v. A.R. Antulay
, this Court held that


Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                                Contd.../-
[43]
the obligation to discharge the accused under Section 239 arises
             only when the Magistrate considers the charge against the
             accused to be groundless.
In the decisions in
State of Delhi v.
             Gyan Devi
, this Court held thus:--
"7. In the backdrop of the factual position discussed above, the
                  question formulated earlier arises for our consideration. The
                  legal position is well settled that at the stage of framing of
                  charge the Trial Court is not to examine and assess in detail
                  the materials placed on record by the prosecution nor is it for
                  the court to consider the sufficiency of the materials to
                  establish the offence alleged against the accused persons. At
                  the stage of charge the court is to examine the materials only
                  with a view to be satisfied that a prima facie case of
                  commission of offence alleged has been made out against the
                  accused persons. It is also well settled that when the petition
                  is filed by the accused under
Section 482
CrPC seeking for
                  the quashing of charge framed against them the court should
                  not interfere with the order unless there are strong reasons to
                  hold that in the interest of justice and to avoid abuse of the
                  process of the court a charge framed against the accused
                  needs to be quashed. Such an order can be passed only in
                  exceptional cases and on rare occasions. It is to be kept in
                  mind that once the Trial Court has framed a charge against an
                  accused the trial must proceed without unnecessary
                  interference by a superior court and the entire evidence from
                  the prosecution side should be placed on record. Any attempt
                  by an accused for quashing of a charge before the entire
                  prosecution evidence has come on record should not be
                  entertained sans exceptional cases."
II.    Quashing of FIR/ framing of charge under
Section 482
of
           CrPC has to be exercised sparingly with caution in rare of
           the rarest cases.
(i) (2002) 3 SCC 89 "State of Karnataka Vs. M. Devendrappa
           & anr." wherein it has been held as under:-
"9. As noted above, the powers possessed by the High Court under
              Section 482 of the Code are very wide and the very plenitude of
              the power requires great caution in its exercise. Court must be
              careful to see that its decision in exercise of this power is based
              on sound principles. The inherent power should not be exercised
              to stifle a legitimate prosecution. The High Court being the highest
              court of a State should normally refrain from giving a prima facie


Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                             Contd.../-
[44]
decision in a case where the entire facts are incomplete and hazy,
             more so when the evidence has not been collected and produced
             before the Court and the issues involved, whether factual or legal,
             are of magnitude and cannot be seen in their true perspective
             without sufficient material. Of course, no hard-and-fast rule can
             be laid down in regard to cases in which the High Court will
             exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction of quashing the proceeding
             at any stage.
(See :
Janata Dal v. H.S. Chowdhary
, and
Raghubir
             Saran (Dr) v. State of Bihar
. It would not be proper for the High
             Court to analyse the case of the complainant in the light of all
             probabilities in order to determine whether a conviction would be
             sustainable and on such premises arrive at a conclusion that the
             proceedings are to be quashed. It would be erroneous to assess
             the material before it and conclude that the complaint cannot be
             proceeded with. In a proceeding instituted on complaint, exercise
             of the inherent powers to quash the proceedings is called for only
             in a case where the complaint does not disclose any offence or is
             frivolous, vexatious or oppressive. If the allegations set out in the
             complaint do not constitute the offence of which cognizance has
             been taken by the Magistrate, it is open to the High Court to quash
             the same in exercise of the inherent powers under Section 482 of
             the Code. It is not, however, necessary that there should be
             meticulous analysis of the case before the trial to find out whether
             the case would end in conviction or acquittal. The complaint has
             to be read as a whole. If it appears that on consideration of the
             allegations in the light of the statement made on oath of the
             complainant that the ingredients of the offence or offences are
             disclosed and there is no material to show that the complaint is
             mala fide, frivolous or vexatious, in that event there would be no
             justification for interference by the High Court. When an
             information is lodged at the police station and an offence is
             registered, then the mala fides of the informant would be of
             secondary importance. It is the material collected during the
             investigation and evidence led in court which decides the fate of
             the accused person. The allegations of mala fides against the
             informant are of no consequence and cannot by themselves be
             the basis for quashing the proceedings.
(See :
Dhanalakshmi v. R.
             Prasanna Kumar
,
State of Bihar v. P.P. Sharma
,
Rupan Deol Bajaj
             v. Kanwar Pal Singh Gill
,
State of Kerala v. O.C. Kuttan
,
State of
             U.P. v. O.P. Sharma
,
Rashmi Kumar v. Mahesh Kumar Bhada
,
Satvinder Kaur v. State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi
) and
Rajesh Bajaj v.
             State NCT of Delhi
.)"
(
ii)   (2020) 3 SCC 317 "Rajeev Kourav Vs. Baisahab & ors
."
wherein it has been held as under -
Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                             Contd.../-
[45]
"8. It is no more res integra that exercise of power under
Section
              482
CrPC to quash a criminal proceeding is only when an
              allegation made in the FIR or the charge-sheet constitutes the
              ingredients of the offence/offences alleged. Interference by the
              High Court under
Section 482
CrPC is to prevent the abuse of
              process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice.
              It is settled law that the evidence produced by the accused in
              his defence cannot be looked into by the court, except in very
              exceptional circumstances, at the initial stage of the criminal
              proceedings. It is trite law that the High Court cannot embark
              upon the appreciation of evidence while considering the
              petition filed under
Section 482
CrPC for quashing criminal
              proceedings. It is clear from the law
laid down by
this Court
              that if a prima facie case is made out disclosing the ingredients
              of the offence alleged against the accused, the Court cannot
              quash a criminal proceeding."
(iii) (2021) 11 SCC 191 "State of Rajasthan Vs. Ashok Kumar
           Kashyap" wherein it has been held as under:-
"11. While considering the legality of the impugned judgment and
               order passed by the High Court, the law on the subject and
               few decisions of this Court are required to be referred to.
              "11.1. In P. Vijayan, this Court had an occasion to consider
Section 227
CrPC What is required to be considered at
                     the time of framing of the charge and/or considering the
                     discharge application has been considered elaborately
                     in the said decision. It is observed and held that at the
                     stage of Section 227, the Judge has merely to sift the
                     evidence in order to find out whether or not there is
                     sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. It
                     is observed that in other words, the sufficiency of
                     grounds would take within its fold the nature of the
                     evidence recorded by the police or the documents
                     produced before the court which ex facie disclose that
                     there are suspicious circumstances against the
                     accused so as to frame a charge against him. It is further
                     observed that if the Judge comes to a conclusion that
                     there is sufficient ground to proceed, he will frame a
                     charge under
Section 228
CrPC, if not, he will discharge
                     the accused. It is further observed that while exercising
                     its judicial mind to the facts of the case in order to
                     determine whether a case for trial has been made out by
                     the prosecution, it is not necessary for the court to enter
                     into the pros and cons of the matter or into a weighing


Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                           Contd.../-
[46]
and balancing of evidence and probabilities which is
                        really the function of the court, after the trial starts."
III.   Company can be prosecuted for commission of offence
           under
Section 420
of IPC.
(i) (2005) 4 SCC 530 "Standard Chartered Bank & ors. Vs.
          Directorate of Enforcement & ors." wherein it has been held
          as under:-
"6. There is no dispute that a company is liable to be prosecuted and
              punished for criminal offences. Although there are earlier
              authorities to the effect that corporations cannot commit a crime,
              the generally accepted modern rule is that except for such crimes
              as a corporation is held incapable of committing by reason of the
              fact that they involve personal malicious intent, a corporation may
              be subject to indictment or other criminal process, although the
              criminal act is committed through its agents."
(
ii) (2011) 1 SCC 74 "Iridium India Telecom Limited Vs.
          Motorola Incorporated
& ors." wherein it has been held as
          under:-
"65. This Court also rejected the submission that a company could
               avoid criminal prosecution in cases where custodial sentence is
               mandatory. Upon examination of the entire issue, it is observed
               as follows: (Standard Chartered Bank case, SCC pp. 548-50,
               paras 27-28 & 30-32)
              "30. As the company cannot be sentenced to imprisonment, the
                   court has to resort to punishment of imposition of fine which
                   is also a prescribed punishment. As per the scheme of
                   various enactments and also the Penal Code, mandatory
                   custodial sentence is prescribed for graver offences. If the
                   appellants' plea is accepted, no company or corporate
                   bodies could be prosecuted for the graver offences whereas
                   they could be prosecuted for minor offences as the
                   sentence prescribed therein is custodial sentence or fine."
...
"31. As the company cannot be sentenced to imprisonment, the
                   court cannot impose that punishment, but when
                   imprisonment and fine is the prescribed punishment the
                   court can impose the punishment of fine which could be
                   enforced against the company. Such a discretion is to be


Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                             Contd.../-
[47]
read into the section so far as the juristic person is
                 concerned. Of course, the court cannot exercise the same
                 discretion as regards a natural person. Then the court would
                 not be passing the sentence in accordance with law. As
                 regards company, the court can always impose a sentence
                 of fine and the sentence of imprisonment can be ignored as
                 it is impossible to be carried out in respect of a company.
                 This appears to be the intention of the legislature and we find
                 no difficulty in construing the statute in such a way. We do
                 not think that there is a blanket immunity for any company
                 from any prosecution for serious offences merely because
                 the prosecution would ultimately entail a sentence of
                 mandatory imprisonment. The corporate bodies, such as a
                 firm or company undertake a series of activities that affect
                 the life, liberty and property of the citizens. Large-scale
                 financial irregularities are done by various corporations. The
                 corporate vehicle now occupies such a large portion of the
                 industrial, commercial and sociological sectors that
                 amenability of the corporation to a criminal law is essential
                 to have a peaceful society with stable economy."
"32. We hold that there is no immunity to the companies from
                 prosecution merely because the prosecution is in respect of
                 offences for which the punishment prescribed is mandatory
                 imprisonment (sic and fine). We overrule the views
                 expressed by the majority in Velliappa Textiles Ltd. on this
                 point and answer the reference accordingly. Various other
                 contentions have been urged in all appeals, including this
                 appeal, they be posted for hearing before an appropriate
                 Bench."
"66. These observations leave no manner of doubt that a
             company/corporation cannot escape liability for a criminal
             offence merely because the punishment prescribed is that of
             imprisonment and fine. We are of the considered opinion that in
             view of the aforesaid judgment of this Court, the conclusion
             reached by the High Court that the respondent could not have the
             necessary mens rea is clearly erroneous."
"67. The next important question which needs to be examined is as to
            whether the averments made in the complaint if taken on their
            face value would not prima facie disclose the ingredients for the
            offence of cheating as defined under
Section 415
IPC. The
            aforesaid section is as under:
"415. Cheating.--Whoever,     by   deceiving   any  person,
                   fraudulently or dishonestly induces the person so
                   deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to


Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                           Contd.../-
[48]
consent that any person shall retain any property, or
                    intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit
                    to do anything which he would not do or omit if he were
                    not so deceived, and which act or omission causes or is
                    likely to cause damage or harm to that person in body,
                    mind, reputation or property, is said to 'cheat'.
                   Explanation.--A dishonest concealment of facts is a
                   deception within the meaning of the section."
"78. In our opinion, the High Court clearly exceeded its jurisdiction in
            quashing the criminal proceeding in the peculiar facts and
            circumstances of this case. The High Court noticed that while
            exercising jurisdiction under
Section 482
CrPC "the complaint in
            its entirety will have to be examined on the basis of the allegations
            made therein. But the High Court has no authority or jurisdiction
            to go into the matter or examine its correctness. The allegations
            in the complaint will have to be accepted on the face of it and the
            truth or falsity cannot be entered into by the Court at this stage".
Having said so, the High Court proceeded to do exactly the
            opposite."
(
iii) (2015) 4 SCC 609 "Sunil Bharti Mittal Vs. CBI
" wherein it
         has been held as under:-
"39. In Iridium India, the aforesaid question fell directly for
            consideration, namely, whether a company could be prosecuted
            for an offence which requires mens rea and discussed this
            aspect at length, taking note of the law that prevails in America
            and England on this issue. For our benefit, we will reproduce
            paras 59-64 herein: (SCC pp. 98-100)
            "59. The courts in England have emphatically rejected the notion
                 that a body corporate could not commit a criminal offence
                 which was an outcome of an act of will needing a particular
                 state of mind. The aforesaid notion has been rejected by
                 adopting the doctrine of attribution and imputation. In other
                 words, the criminal intent of the 'alter ego' of the
                 company/body corporate i.e. the person or group of persons
                 that guide the business of the company, would be imputed
                 to the corporation."
"60. It may be appropriate at this stage to notice the observations
                 made by MacNaghten, J. in Director of Public Prosecutions
                 v. Kent and Sussex Contractors Ltd.
A body corporate is a "person" to whom, amongst the
                     various attributes it may have, there should be imputed
                     the attribute of a mind capable of knowing and forming



Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                            Contd.../-
[49]
an intention--indeed it is much too late in the day to
                    suggest the contrary. It can only know or form an
                    intention through its human agents, but circumstances
                    may be such that the knowledge of the agent must be
                    imputed to the body corporate. Counsel for the
                    respondents says that, although a body corporate may be
                    capable of having an intention, it is not capable of having
                    a criminal intention. In this particular case the intention
                    was the intention to deceive. If, as in this case, the
                    responsible agent of a body corporate puts forward a
                    document knowing it to be false and intending that it
                    should deceive, I apprehend, according to the authorities
                    that Viscount Caldecote, L.C.J., has cited, his knowledge
                    and intention must be imputed to the body corporate.
            "61. The principle has been reiterated by Lord Denning in Bolton
                 (H.L.)(Engg.)
Co. Ltd. v. T.J. Graham & Sons Ltd.
in the
                 following words: (QB p. 172)
                    A company may in many ways be likened to a human
                    body. They have a brain and a nerve centre which
                    controls what they do. They also have hands which hold
                    the tools and act in accordance with directions from the
                    centre. Some of the people in the company are mere
                    servants and agents who are nothing more than hands to
                    do the work and cannot be said to represent the mind or
                    will. Others are Directors and managers who represent
                    the directing mind and will of the company, and control
                    what they do. The state of mind of these managers is the
                    state of mind of the company and is treated by the law as
                    such. So you will find that in cases where the law requires
                    personal fault as a condition of liability in tort, the fault of
                    the manager will be the personal fault of the company.
That is made clear in Lord Haldane's speech in Lennard's
                    Carrying Co. Ltd. v. Asiatic Petroleum Co. Ltd.. So also in
                    the criminal law, in cases where the law requires a guilty
                    mind as a condition of a criminal offence, the guilty mind
                    of the Directors or the managers will render the company
                    themselves guilty."
"62. The aforesaid principle has been firmly established in
                England since the decision of the House of Lords in Tesco
                Supermarkets Ltd. v. Nattrass. In stating the principle of
                corporate liability for criminal offences, Lord Reid made the
                following statement of law : (AC p. 170 E-G)
                    'I must start by considering the nature of the personality
                    which by a fiction the law attributes to a corporation. A


Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                               Contd.../-
[50]
living person has a mind which can have knowledge or
                    intention or be negligent and he has hands to carry out
                    his intentions. A corporation has none of these : it must
                    act through living persons, though not always one or the
                    same person. Then the person who acts is not speaking
                    or acting for the company. He is acting as the company
                    and his mind which directs his acts is the mind of the
                    company. There is no question of the company being
                    vicariously liable. He is not acting as a servant,
                    representative, agent or delegate. He is an embodiment
                    of the company or, one could say, he hears and speaks
                    through the persona of the company, within his
                    appropriate sphere, and his mind is the mind of the
                    company. If it is a guilty mind then that guilt is the guilt of
                    the company. It must be a question of law whether, once
                    the facts have been ascertained, a person in doing
                    particular things is to be regarded as the company or
                    merely as the company's servant or agent. In that case
                    any liability of the company can only be a statutory or
                    vicarious liability.'
            "63. From the above it becomes evident that a corporation is
                 virtually in the same position as any individual and may be
                 convicted of common law as well as statutory offences
                 including those requiring mens rea. The criminal liability of
                 a corporation would arise when an offence is committed in
                 relation to the business of the corporation by a person or
                 body of persons in control of its affairs. In such
                 circumstances, it would be necessary to ascertain that the
                 degree and control of the person or body of persons is so
                 intense that a corporation may be said to think and act
                 through the person or the body of persons. The position of
                 law on this issue in Canada is almost the same. Mens rea is
                 attributed to corporations on the principle of 'alter ego' of
                 the company."
"64. So far as India is concerned, the legal position has been
                 clearly stated by the Constitution Bench judgment of this
                 Court in
Standard Chartered Bank v. Directorate of
                 Enforcement
. On a detailed consideration of the entire body
                 of case laws in this country as well as other jurisdictions, it
                 has been observed as follows: (SCC p. 541, para 6)
                '6. There is no dispute that a company is liable to be
                    prosecuted and punished for criminal offences. Although
                    there are earlier authorities to the effect that corporations
                    cannot commit a crime, the generally accepted modern
                    rule is that except for such crimes as a corporation is held


Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                              Contd.../-
[51]
incapable of committing by reason of the fact that they
                    involve personal malicious intent, a corporation may be
                    subject to indictment or other criminal process, although
                    the criminal act is committed through its agents."
[21]      I have heard the rival submissions advanced by the learned

counsel appearing for the parties at length and also carefully examined

the materials available on record. I have also carefully gone through the

entire charge-sheet submitted by the CBI and also carefully perused the

impugned judgment and order dated 08-09-2017 passed by the Special

Judge, Imphal West in Special Trial (PC) Case No. 12 of 2016.
In the present case, it is an undisputed fact and on record that

in response to the NIT issued by RIMS, altogether five bidders, including

the petitioner company, submitted their tender forms along with proforma

invoice with prices and specifications. It is also an undisputed fact that

the Accused No. 5, which is the Indian agent of the petitioner company

submitted the tender form on the petitioner's behalf and that none of the

Directors or Key Managerial Personnel of the company was involved in

the tender process representing the petitioner company. It is also an

undisputed fact and on record that the Tender Opening Committee

unanimously accepted the tender quotation submitted by the Indian

agent of the petitioner company (Accused No. 5) as the other four

tenders did not met the specifications notified under the NIT, specifically

as they lack three essential features, i.e., Isocentric at 100 cm, 250 RMM

output source and collision detection device. Faced with such

 Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                        Contd.../-
[52]
undisputed facts, this court cannot find any fault in the action of either

the Tender Opening Committee or on the part of the concerned

authorities of RIMS in accepting the tender bids submitted on behalf of

the petitioner company and in not accepting the remaining four bids

submitted by the four other bidders even though they quoted lower price

of the machine than the price quoted on behalf of the petitioner company.
The contentions on behalf of the prosecution that the

specifications of the telecobalt machine as notified in the NIT was a

tailor-made in order to favour the petitioner company remains just a mere

allegation in the absence of any material to support such allegation. On

examination of the entire charge-sheet submitted by the CBI, no material

is found on record to support such allegation and to prima facie establish

grave suspicion against the petitioner company. In my considered view,

in the total absence of prima facie materials to establish grave suspicion

against the petitioner, framing of charges for committing offence of

cheating as provided under
Section 420
IPC is unwarranted and unjust.


[22]      It is quite true that M/s Panacea Medical Technologies Private

Limited quoted a lower price than the petitioner company and proposed

to supply the telecobalt machine at a much lower price, however, it is

found on record that the telecobalt machine proposed to be supplied by

M/s Panacea Private Limited did not met the technical specifications

notified in the NIT more particularly, three essential features, viz.,

 Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                   Contd.../-
[53]
Isocentric at 100 cm, 250 RMM output source and collision detection

device. In this regard, the then Director, RIMS (Accused No. 1) wrote

letters to various authorities including Bhabha Atomic Research Centre

(BARC) to inquire about the technical compatibility of the machine to be

supplied by M/s Panacea Medical Technologies Private Limited and only

after verifying the fact that the telecobalt machine to be supplied by M/s

Panacea Medical Technologies Private Limited are yet to be met the

technical specifications or lacks the said technical specifications, the

supply order was issued in favour of the petitioner company. In such a

situation and given the undisputed facts and materials available on

record, this court cannot agree with the submission made on behalf of

the CBI that there is prima facie material or strong suspicion of the

petitioner company committing the offence of cheating as provided

under
Section 420
of the IPC.
[23]      This court is also satisfied that the petitioner company had not

done any act of deception or dishonest inducement leading to wrongful

gain or had mens rea to cheat from the very outset. Given the fact that

the petitioner company had already supplied the said telecobalt

machines all over the world including to many renowned medical

institutions in India and especially when there is no allegation that the

petitioner company quoted a much higher price for the said machine than

the price it had already fixed earlier, this court cannot agree with the


 Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                   Contd.../-
[54]
submission made on behalf of the CBI that the petitioner company

deceived with dishonest inducement leading to wrongful gain and that it

had committed any act of cheating.
[24]      A plain reading of the charge-sheet reveals that there is a

complete absence of any material indicating that the petitioner company

or the personal group of persons that guide the business of the company

made any inducement, fraudulent, dishonest or otherwise to any person

resulting in wrongful gain to the petitioner company or loss to RIMS. The

entire foundation of the alleged "prime facie" or "grave suspicion" against

the Accused No. 6 is raised on a vague and unsubstantiated claim that

some fraudulent or dishonest act was committed even before the tender

process began. However, a thorough examination of the charge-sheet

and accompanying documents reveals not a single instance of any

inducement, fraudulent, dishonest or otherwise by the Accused No. 6

and in the absence of any specific act of inducement, the very basis for

invoking
Section 420
IPC collapses. In fact, in the entire charge-sheet,

there is no material whatsoever to even prime facie shows that the

ingredients of offence under
Section 420
of the IPC have been made out

against Accused No. 6. The prosecution's attempt to proceed against

Accused No. 6 is not only speculative but also contrary to the settled

principles of law, which requires clear, cogent and credible material to

justify the framing of charges.
Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                    Contd.../-
[55]
[25]      Considering the materials available on record, this court finds
force and merit in the submission made on behalf of the petitioner

company and this court also respectfully agrees with the principle of law
laid down by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the abovementioned

judgments cited by the learned senior counsel appearing for the

petitioner. This court also respectfully agrees with the unequivocal

findings of the coordinate bench of this court in Cri. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of

2017 that as there is no allegation that Theratron Equinox 100 SAD of

the petitioner company was purchased at a higher price than the market

rate and that there is no issue of wrongful gain by the petitioner or

wrongful loss by RIMS and the said findings are directly relevant in the

present case and binding to this court. In my considered view, the said

findings strike at the very foundation of the allegation under
Section 420
of the IPC which requires proof of dishonest inducement resulting in

wrongful gain or loss thereby negating any element of personal benefit

or dishonest intention. These findings conclusively establish that the

essential ingredients of the offences of cheating, including dishonest

inducement, wrongful gain and mens rea are entirely absent in the

present case.
[26]      This court also finds force and merit in the submission made

on behalf of the petitioner that in the absence of any allegations against

its Director or those who are controlling the affairs of the company, the


 Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                    Contd.../-
[56]
company alone cannot be made an accused for an offence of cheating

inasmuch as cheating involves mental element, i.e., mens rea. This view

is strongly supported by principles of law
laid down by
the Hon'ble Apex

Court in the cases of "
HDFC Bank Limited Vs. State of Bihar
" (supra),
Sunil Bharti Mittal
" (supra) and Iridium India Telecom Limited"
(supra).
In the case of "
Sunil Bharti Mittal
" (supra), both the principle of

law
laid down by
the Hon'ble Apex Court in the cases of "
Standard

Chartered Bank
" (supra) and "
Iridium India Telecom Limited
" (supra)

were considered by the Hon'ble Apex Court at paras. 37 to 40 and

explained the principle of law which has been
laid down in
the above two

judgments to the effect that the criminal intent of the "alter ego" of the

company that is the personal group of persons that guide the business

or control the affairs of the company would be imputed to the company.
In the present case, M/s Kirloskar Technologies Private Ltd.

(Accused No. 5) is merely an agent of the petitioner company for

marketing the telecobalt machine manufactured by the petitioner

company in India and as such, the Accused No. 5 cannot be included

within the definition of the persons or group of persons who control the

affairs of the company. By no stress of imagination, it can be said that

the Accused No. 5 represent the directing mind and will of the petitioner



 Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                      Contd.../-
[57]
company and the Accused No. 5's state of mind and will cannot be said

to be the state of mind and will of the company.
[27]        For the findings and reasons stated hereinabove, I am of the

considered view that there is no sufficient ground for trying the Accused

No. 6 in the instant criminal case. Accordingly, the present petition is

allowed by setting aside the impugned judgment and order dated

08-09-2017 passed by the Special Judge (PC) Act, Imphal West in

Special Trial (PC) Case No. 12 of 2016 and the petitioner will stands

discharged.
In view of the facts and circumstances of the present case,

there will be no order as to cost.
JUDGE


FR / NFR




Devananda




 Crl. Rev. Petn. No. 19 of 2017                                  Contd.../-