SOURCE: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1468619/
SCRAPED: 2026-02-18T10:25:53.509780
TITLE: Full Document
================================================================================

[Cites
36
, Cited by
1
]
Bombay High Court
R.V. Bhasin vs State Of Maharashtra on 6 January, 2010
Author:
Ranjana Desai
Bench:
Ranjana Desai
,
D.Y. Chandrachud
,
R.S. Mohite
AJN
                                 1

          IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY




                                                                     
               IN ITS SPECIAL JURISDICTION UNDER




                                             
                  CR.P.C. SECTIONS 95 AND 96.

          CRIMINAL APPLICATION NO.1421 OF 2007




                                            
    R.V. Bhasin,                       )
    76, Bajaj Bhavan, Nariman Point,   )
    Mumbai - 400 021, residing at      )
    9/4, Bradys Flats, S.B. Road,      )




                                    
    Colaba, Mumbai - 400 005.          )    ....    Applicant

              Versus
                       
     1 State of Maharashtra            )
                      
     2 Marine Drive Police Station, )
       Mumbai.                      )      ... Respondents
        


                   And
     



     1 Indian Union Muslim League      )
     2 Maharashtra Muslim Lawyers )





       Forum                      )
     3 Islamic Research Foundation )
     4 Jamat-e-Islami-e-Hind           )





     5 Bombay Aman Committee           )
     6 Ishwar Prasad G. Khandelwal )       ... Intervenors

    Mr. J.P. Cama, senior counsel with Mr. R.J. Cama i/b. Mr.
    R.V. Bhasin for the applicant.

    Mr. Ravi Kadam, Advocate General with Mr. S.R. Borulkar
    and Mr. P.A. Pol, Public Prosecutor with Ms. M.M.
    Deshmukh for the State.




                                             ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:24 :::
     AJN
                                   2

    Mr. Y.H. Muchhala, senior counsel with Mr. Amin Solkar,




                                                                      
    Mr. Shaikh Yakub and Mr. Mubin Solkar i/b M/s. Judicial
    Law & Associates for intervenors 4 to 8.




                                              
    Mr. I.G. Khandelwal - intervenor 3 - in person.

                      CORAM : SMT. RANJANA DESAI,
                              DR. D.Y. CHANDRACHUD &




                                             
                              R.S. MOHITE, JJJ.

                      DATE ON WHICH THE JUDGMENT IS
                      RESERVED : 14TH AUGUST, 2009.




                                      
                      DATE ON WHICH THE JUDGMENT IS
                         
                      PRONOUNCED : 6TH JANUARY, 2010.
                        
    JUDGMENT :
- (Per Smt. Ranjana Desai, J.)
1.      Rule. Respondents waive service. With the consent
        


    of the parties and at the request of the counsel, taken up
     



    for hearing.
2.      The applicant, who is an advocate, is the author of a

    book entitled "Islam - A concept of Political World Invasion





    By Muslims"      ("the book"). The book was published in

    2003 by National Publications, 76, Bajaj Bhavan, Nariman

    Point, Mumbai of which the applicant claims to be the

    proprietor. The book was translated into Hindi by Dr. Anil

    Misr.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:24 :::
AJN
3
3.    In exercise of powers conferred by sub-section (1) of
section 95
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 ("the

    Code")    the   Government       of   Maharashtra        issued         a




                                             
    notification dated 9/3/2007 ("the Notification") and

    declared that every copy of the book as well as of the




                                    
    translation thereof shall be banned and forfeited to
                       
    Government. The Notification is as follows :
"NOTIFICATION
                 General Administration Department
                   Mantralaya, Mumbai - 400 032
                      Dated the 9th March, 2007.
Code of
             Criminal
     



             Procedure
, 1973.
No.PUB2007-C.N.15/07-XXXIV          -
             WHEREAS the national Publications having





             its office at 76, Bajaj Bhavan, Nariman
             Point, Mumbai - 400 021, has published a
             Book, in the year 2003, captioned as
             "ISLAM - A Concept of Political World





             Invasion by Muslims" written by one R.V.
             Basin, Advocate Supreme Court of India,
             containing 166 pages and translated in
             Hindi by Dr. Anil Mishra captioned as
             "ISLAM      RAJNAITIK    VISHWA       PAR
             MUSLIM AKRAMAN KI AVADHARANA"
containing 180 pages (hereinafter referred
             as the said Book" and "the translated
             Book" respectively).
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:24 :::
AJN
4
AND WHEREAS the author of the said
          book (and in the relevant translation
          thereof as "the translated Book") has made




                                          
          several derogatory and false statements
          about Muslim religion, Muslim community,
          Mohammed Paigambar and Muslim priests,
          as specified in Schedule appended hereto.
AND WHEREAS the author of the said
          Book (and in the relevant translation
          thereof as "the translated Book") has made




                                  
          derogatory and false statements on page
          number 4 referring to Muslim religious Book
                    
          Quaran that, Muslims should kill Kafirs (Non
- Muslims) and if they do so it is stated on
          page number 4 that, they would be given
                   
          72 beautiful girls and 72 handsome youth;
          similarly, the author has stated on page
          number 5 further that, where-ever Muslims
          are ruling other religious people be killed
        


          and on page number 10 thereof it is stated
          that, Muslims do not consider and accept
     



          other religious people equal to them and
          that where-ever Muslim population is less
          they are increasing it in an attempt to make
          themselves equal with others, therefore it is





          said that "Hum Panch, Hamaare Pachhis".
AND WHEREAS the author of the said
          Book (and in the relevant translation





          thereof as "the translated Book") has made
          derogatory and false statements about
          Jihaad, Quaran, Mohammed Paigambar,
          Indian Muslims and conversion on page
          numbers 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 21, 23, 25, 28,
          43, 45, 104, 136, 150, 151, 152, 155, 159
          and 160 etc. which poses danger to social
          harmony as well as law and order situation;
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:24 :::
AJN
5
AND WHEREAS on page number 23 of




                                                                 
          the said Book in the relevant translation
          thereof as the translated Book", "Khatme
          Nawabac" (Nabuwat) has been written as




                                         
          sentiments of Muslims;
AND WHEREAS this might raise a
          question mark about the basic aim and




                                        
          objective behind writing the book without
          taking    the  Muslim     sentiments    into
          consideration   and    without   giving    a
          thorough consideration to the subject, the




                                 
          Government has taken serious note of this
          derogatory,ig tasteless    and    malicious
          writings;
AND WHEREAS in column of Hindi
                   
          evening      newspaper      "Dopahar     Ka
                                 th
          Saamana", dated 20 January 2007 an
          article is published captioned as "Dharmki
          Aadme Apna Hee Jugad" has referred the
        


          translated Book, and an offence has been
          registered against the Editor, Executive
     



          Editor, Printer and Writer of the said Book
          under sections 153A, 295A, 505 read with
          34 of
Indian Penal Code
in Dadar Police
          Station as C.R. No.34/07;
AND WHEREAS for the reasons
          aforesaid the Government of Maharashtra
          is of the opinion that the circulation and





          sale of the said Book and relevant
          translation thereof as the translated Book
          contain     abusive    language    bringing
          meanness to Jihaad, Quaran, Mohammed
          Paigambar, Indian Muslims and conversion,
          as well as derogatory and false references
          therein is likely to create hatred against
          Muslims in the minds of non-Muslims
          thereby promoting enmity between classes
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:24 :::
AJN
6
so also the said Book and relevant




                                                                  
          translation thereof as the translated Book
          outrages the fillings of a Muslim section of
          society and maliciously insulting the




                                          
          religion and religious beliefs of Muslims and
          likely to lead to acts of violence and
          disharmony and that any further circulation
          and sale of the said Book and relevant




                                         
          translation thereof as a translated Book is
          likely to result in breach of peace and
          public tranquility between classes and
          groups, as such the said Book and relevant




                                  
          translated Book should be forfeited;
NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the
          powers conferred by sub-section (1) of
section 95
of the Code of Criminal
                   
          Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), in its
          application to the State of Maharashtra, the
          Government       of   Maharashtra    hereby
          declares that every copy of the said Book
        


          "ISLAM - A Concept of Political World
          Invasion by Muslims" as well as the
     



          relevant    translation   thereof  as    the
          translated Book - "ISLAM RAJNAITIK
          VISHWA      PAR     MUSLIM    AKRAMAN     KI
          AVADHARANA" shall be banned and





          forfeited to the Government.
SCHEDULE
1.   "Gandhi advocated pardon to the
          Assassin    Muslim  who  killed  Swami
          Shradhhanand, who was believed to have
          written a book with its Title "rangeela
          Rasul"? (Preface)."
2.  "The Muslims believe and are ordained
          by their holy religious texts to eliminate
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:24 :::
AJN
7
Kufr and the Kafirs from the surface of the




                                                                   
          earth. Any bloody war that is fought by the
          believers against the nonbelievers carries
          the    religious   sanction    of   Islam".
(Introduction page numbers 3 and 4).
3.   "Should he die in this pursuit, the God
          assumed     Almighty    as    per Quaranic




                                          
          statements assures to such pursuer of faith,
          an assured life joy and pleasure in the
          heavens where he is promised to be served
          by 72 beautiful maidens and 72 young male




                                   
          children to beget pleasure. Such a person
          is called as Shaheed. Should he survive
                     
          while pursuing this aim and live on the
          earth, Quaran promises on behalf of the
          God Almighty Allaha to enjoy the life on
                    
          earth by using all that he gets by way of
          victory over the Kafirs." (Introduction page
          number 4)
4.    "Islam declares to its followers where
          political governance is in the hands of the
     



          believers, they are to act and crush any
          counter idea and where it still lacks political
          control then to lie on wait for the moment
          when through all other means, Darul-Herb





          gets        converted        into      Darul-
Islam." (Introduction page number 5).
5.   "Muslims do not and cannot accept





          any non-believer as equal to them and
          hence Modi of Gujarat too right when he
          cautions Indian people UNITE to safeguard
          themselves from the Muslim invasion who
          are waiting only to convert India from Darul
          Herb to Darul Islam and now openly say
          and believe in HAM PAANCH - HAMARRE
          PACCHIS."(page number 10).
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:24 :::
AJN
8
6.    "This is one religion that supports its




                                                                   
          spread     by    waging    jehads    including
          justifying conducts of terrorism when it
          says "show no mercy to the non-believers




                                           
          (Kafirs) or the idol worshipers and lie in wait
          for them to behead them when they appear
          before you.         (the believers i.e. the
          Muslims)". (page number 17, para 2).
7.   "Islam considers weaker sex of women
          as a commodity meant for the use and
          pleasure of men owing allegiance to Islam."
And "Those who embraced Islam in India,
          mostly did so under the threat of sword or
                     
          were lured into it for its easy promise of
          heavens where beautiful women and young
          kids were promised as rewards to the
                    
          believers." (page number 28, para 2).
8.    "HOWEVER ON GOING THROUGH
          SEVERALS OF ITS AYATS, ITS ORDAINMENTS
        


          GIVEN TO ITS FOLLOWERS ARE NOT ONLY
          DANGERIOUS BUT IN FACT PROMOTE
     



          HATRED IN THE SOCIETY, IT IS BOUND TO
          CREATE     BITTERNESS    BETWEEN    THE
          MUSLIMS AND THE NON-MUSLIMS LIVING IN
          AAA ``AINDIA" REF IS MADE TO
IPC
SECTION 153A SUB-SECTIONS (a) & (b) YET
          IT IS NOT APPLIED AGAINST MUSLIM'S HOLY
          BOOK." (page number 104, para 4).
By order and in the name of the
            Governor of Maharashtra,

                     Sd/-
(Manisha Mhaiskar)
          Joint Secretary to the Government."
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:24 :::
AJN
9
4.    The applicant has in this application, inter alia,




                                                                      
    challenged the Notification.
5.
Section 95
insofar as it is relevant reads thus:
"95. Power    to    declare  certain
             publications forfeited and to issue




                                      
             search warrants for the same. - (1)
             Where -
(a)   any newspaper, or book, or
(b)   any document,

             wherever printed, appears to the State
             Government to contain any matter the
        


             publication of which is punishable under
             section 124-A or section 153-A or section
     



             153-B or section 292 or
section 293
or
section 295-A
of the Indian Penal Code (45
             of 1860), the State Government may, by
             notification, stating the grounds of its





             opinion, declare every copy of the issue of
             the newspaper containing such matter, and
             every copy of such book or other document
             to be forfeited to Government, and





             thereupon any police officer may seize the
             same wherever found in India and any
             Magistrate may by warrant authorize any
             police officer not below the rank of sub-
inspector to enter upon and search for the
             same in any premises where any copy of
             such issue or any such book or other
             document may be or may be reasonably
             suspected to be.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:24 :::
AJN
10
(2)   In this section and in
section 96
, -
(a) "newspaper" and "book"
have the same meaning as in the
Press and
             Registration of Books Act, 1867
(25 of
             1867)
(b) "document" includes any
             painting, drawing or photograph, or other
             visible representation.
(3) No order passed or action taken
             under this section shall be called in
                       
             question in any Court otherwise than in
             accordance with the provisions of section
             96".
6.    Under Section 96 of the Code, a person having any
        


    interest in any newspaper, book or other document, in
     



    respect of which a declaration of forfeiture has been made

    has to apply to the High Court and every such application





    has to be heard by a Special Bench of the High Court of

    three judges. Hence, this application filed under Sections





    95 and 96 of the Code is placed before this Bench.
Section 96 of the Code reads thus:
"96. Application to High Court to
            set aside declaration of forfeiture.-
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:24 :::
AJN
11
(1)   Any person having any interest in
          any newspaper, book or other document, in
          respect of which a declaration of forfeiture




                                          
          has been made under section 95, may,
          within two months from the date of
          publication in the Official Gazette of such
          declaration, apply to the High Court to set




                                         
          aside such declaration on the ground that
          the issue of the newspaper, or the book or
          other document, in respect of which the
          declaration was made, did not contain any




                                  
          such matter as is referred to in sub-section
          (1) of section 95.
(2)  Every such application shall,
          where the High Court consists of three or
                    
          more Judges, be heard and determined by
          a Special Bench of the High Court
          composed of three Judges and where the
          High Court consists of less than three
        


          Judges, such Special Bench shall be
          composed of all the Judges of that High
     



          Court.
(3)   On the hearing of any such
          application   with  reference    to   any





          newspaper, any copy of such newspaper
          may be given in evidence in aid of the
          proof of the nature or tendency of the
          words, signs or visible representations





          contained in such newspaper, in respect of
          which the declaration of forfeiture was
          made.
(4)   The High Court shall, if it is not
          satisfied that the issue of the newspaper,
          or the book or other document, in respect
          of which the application has been made,
          contained any such matter as is referred to
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:24 :::
AJN
12
in sub-section (1) of section 95, set aside




                                                                        
            the declaration of forfeiture.
(5)   Where       there is a difference of




                                                
            opinion among          the Judges forming the
            Special Bench,        the decision shall be in
            accordance with       the opinion of the majority
            of those judges.
7.    Though the Notification does not specifically state




                                         
    which sections of the
Indian Penal Code
are attracted, it
                          
    mentions its likely effects such as creation of hatred
                         
    against Muslims, promoting enmity between classes,

    likelihood of violence, breach of harmony, peace and
        


    public tranquility.    The case of the respondents in the
     



    written submissions and in the oral arguments of the

    Advocate General is that the book is forfeited on the





    ground that it contains matter, the publication of which

    would constitute offences punishable under Sections





    153A, 153-B and 295-A.
8.    The   Indian    Union    Muslim   League,      Maharashtra,

    Muslim Lawyers Forum, Islamic Research Foundation,

    Jamat-e-Islami-e-Hind and Bombay Aman Committee filed
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:24 :::
AJN
13
intervention     applications.        Since        the    meaning            and




                                                                               
    interpretation of the Ayats from the Quaran are the




                                                       
    subject matter of the submissions made before this court,

    on 20/3/3009, we allowed the intervention applications




                                                      
    with a view to getting suitable assistance in finding the

    true meaning and content of the relevant Ayats upon




                                         
    which the central theme of the book is based.                                 Mr.
                         
    Muchala, senior counsel for the interveners informed the

    court that he is representing the interveners noted above.
9.    Mr. Ishwar Prasad G. Khandelwal, who is stated to be
        


    the   National     President     of       a     Non        Governmental
     



    Organization known as "the Right to Read Foundation"
filed an intervention application.            Since, we had allowed





    intervention     applications     filed       by     the        aforestated

    organizations/associations, we allowed the intervention





    application of Mr. Khandelwal in the interest of justice, on

    the same day.
10. Counsel for the petitioner submitted that (i) The
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:24 :::
AJN
14
applicant was not aware of the Notification till 5/4/2007




                                                                     
    when his office was raided. The Notification must be set




                                             
    aside as the applicant was not given a pre-decisional

    hearing;   (ii) The Notification states in substance that in




                                            
    the opinion of the State Government, certain passages of

    the book as reproduced in the schedule were false and




                                     
    derogatory and "might have been" written without taking
                       
    into account `Muslim sentiments'. Counsel submitted that

    the Notification gives no basis, reason or grounds for the
                      
    State to come to the aforesaid opinion and the mandate

    of Section 95 is, therefore, violated; (iii) since 2003, when
        


    the   book was published, it was in     circulation and the
     



    Government had found no grounds to act under Section

    95 until 9/3/2007 the respondents' action is therefore





    barred by law of limitation; (iv) The Notification is vague

    because it does not mention which of the several sections





    set out in Section 95 have been violated.                 This has

    deprived the applicant of his right to fully and fairly

    exercise his statutory right of making application under

    Section 96 of the Code; (v) In paragraph 2 of the
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:24 :::
AJN
15
Notification only certain pages have been stipulated as




                                                                       
    containing offensive material.      The Advocate General




                                               
    culled out certain passages from some of those pages

    which, according to him, are offensive. There is nothing in




                                              
    the State's affidavit to indicate that even these grounds

    actually prevailed upon the Government on the date on




                                      
    which   the   Notification   was   made.         The       basic        or
                       
    fundamental precondition for the exercise of power

    namely, an ex-facie exposition of the Government's
                      
    reasons is not established; (vi) The Notification does not

    state Government's reasons to believe how a book
        


    published four years' ago can suddenly upset Muslim
     



    sentiment in 2007 or how the above mere "likelihood"
comes within the ambit of Section 153A and /or
section





    295A
of the IPC; (vii) The motive of the applicant in writing

    the book was to bring home to society certain features





    and facets of Islam of which readers might not have been

    aware. The book is a historical analysis of certain lesser-
known aspects of Islam and is not intended to promote

    feelings of enmity or hatred among classes of persons or
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:24 :::
AJN
16
to cause insult to any particular class or community; (viii)




                                                                    
    The bonafides of the applicant are evident from his




                                            
    statement at page 99 that we are a secular nation and

    from the fact that he has avoided reference to some of




                                           
    the `more provocative' Ayats. The book sets out certain

    views on Islam of which the applicant became aware upon




                                     
    his own research; (ix) In view of the law laid down by the
                         
    Supreme Court, the respondents are entitled to rely only

    upon those portions of the book which have been
                        
    reproduced in the schedule annexed to the Notification.
The Notification must be read strictly to see if it sets out
        


    not only the opinion of the Government but also the
     



    grounds forming the said opinion.      The onus is on the

    respondents to first make out a case under Section 95 of





    the Code for forfeiting the book.       It is only after a

    reasonable opinion based on objective grounds is shown





    to exist that the onus of disproving the Government's

    stand arises.    In the present case, there is only an

    "opinion" but no "objective grounds" supporting them.
Certain   passages   which   have    been     cited        by      the
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:24 :::
AJN
17
respondents      are   taken   from    printed      historical          and




                                                                          
    religious writing. In this connection, reliance was placed




                                                  
    on    certain    passages    from    the    books     "The        Islamic

    Invasion" by Robert Morey, "Rongeela Rasool" by Pandit




                                                 
    Chamupati, "Sex & Violence" by Anwar Shaikh, "Islam &

    Terrorism" by Anwar Shaikh. "Vedic Civilization" by Anwar




                                        
    Shaikh, "The Islamic Word View" by Sujata Hazarika &
                           
    Ramya Murlitharan, "Jihad and Jannat in Hadiths" by Dr.

    K.V. Palival, "Don't say we didn't warn you", "Great
                          
    Thinkers    on    Islam"    compiled   by    Rana       Pratap         Roy,

    "Islamization of India by the Sufis" by Purshottam, "Hindu
        


    Chintan" by Anand Shankar Pandya and "Speeches of
     



    Mohammed Ali Jinnah and Dr. B.R. Ambedkar and Anti

    Hindus" by P. Goradia and K. Phanda; (x) Freedom of





    expression is not founded on the wisdom of the opinion or

    the amount of research put in before it is expressed; nor





    is it dependent on the quality of the literature, the art or

    the speech. It is founded on the inherent human right to

    express one's views and is subject to a limited deterrent

    that this shall not be permitted if it is aimed at social
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:25 :::
AJN
18
unrest, hatred, etc.; The         freedom of expression of the




                                                                             
    applicant must be protected by quashing the Notification




                                                     
    and    lifting    the   ban on the book; (xi) What has been

    stated in    the    book is not        untrue or unknown and is




                                                    
    borne out by       the recent events and publication in the

    media.      The concept of global jihad; the desire for




                                          
    Islamisation of India, the belief of Muslim leaders that all
                            
    Muslims are born Mujahids and they expect all true

    believers    to    give   completely     their     possessions             and
                           
    persons to jihad even in this day and age have been

    published and circulated in newspapers.                        These are
        


    common       perceptions     of     Indian    society.           If     these
     



    newspapers have not brought about communal hatred,

    the respondents must explain how the book with a





    publication of about 10,000 copies is said to be ostensibly

    aimed at achieving this objective. (xii) With the advent of





    the internet, all information is available to everyone.
Banning a book would          not      achieve the desired effect

    and,     it would be a pointless exercise.                Reliance was

    placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Ajay
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:25 :::
AJN
19
Goswami    v.   Union of India & Ors. (2007) 1 SCC
143.
11. In support of his submissions, Counsel relied on the




                                        
    Supreme Court's judgments in Ramji Lal Modi v. State

    of U.P., AIR 1957 SC 620; Harnam Das v. State of




                                   
    U.P., AIR 1961 SC 1662; Narayan Das Indurkhya v.
State of M.P., AIR 1972 SC 2086;
Nawabkhan

    Abbaskhan v. State of Gujarat
, AIR 1974 SC 1471;
State of U.P.   v.   Lalai Singh Yadav
, AIR 1977 SC

    202;
Balwant Singh & Anr. v. State of Punjab
, AIR
        


    1995 SC 1785;
Manzar Syeed Khan v. The State of
     



    Maharashtra & Anr.
, (2007) 5 SCC 1 and Baragur

    Ramchandra & Ors. v.      State of Karnataka & Ors.
(2007) 5 SCC 11 and on the judgment of the Nagpur

    High Court in Bhagwati Charan Shukla v. Provincial





    Government C.P. & Berar, AIR (34) 1947 Nagpur 1.
Reliance was placed on the judgments of this court in
Gopal Godse v. The Union of India & Ors.
, AIR 1971

    Bombay 56; M/s.
Varsha Publications Pvt. Ltd. &
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:25 :::
AJN
20
Anr. v. State of Maharashtra & Ors.
, 1983 Cri.L.J.




                                                                    
    1446 and Anand Chintamani Dighe & Anr. v. State




                                            
    of Maharashtra & Ors., 2002 (1) Bom.C.R. 57 and in
Sangharaj Rupawate & Ors. v. Nitin Gadre & Ors
.
in    Writ   Petition   No.1721   of   2004      decided           on

    26/4/2007.
12. The Advocate General submitted that (i) There are

    three facets of a valid notification.     They are (a) The
                       
    forfeited book must contain any matter; (b) Such matter

    must promote or must be intended to promote feelings of
        


    enmity or hatred between different classes of people; and
(c) The notification must contain a statement of the

    grounds of the Government's opinion. The first and the





    second requirements are set out in the second last

    paragraph of the Notification. The Notification promotes





    enmity between Muslims and Non-Muslims and which may

    outrage the feelings of the Muslims resulting in a breach

    of peace and acts of violence; (ii) The grounds of the

    opinion are stated in the Notification.     The Notification
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:25 :::
AJN
21
satisfies all the requirements. It is not necessary to quote




                                                                    
    verbatim the offending paragraphs in the notification.
Hence, the applicant cannot contend that matters not

    specified in the Notification cannot be relied upon by the




                                           
    respondents to substantiate their case; (iii) Grounds of

    opinion mean the conclusions of facts on which the




                                    
    opinion is based.      Grounds can be brief and the
                       
    Notification clearly indicates the grounds on which the

    respondent formed an opinion that the book contains
                      
    matter which attracts the penal provisions of the
IPC
; (iv)

    The strict requirement of proving mens rea in criminal
        


    proceedings initiated under Section 153-A or 295-A will
     



    not apply to a notification under Section 95 because

    Section 95 only states that it has `to appear' to the





    Government    that a particular    book contains matter

    punishable under the
IPC
; (v) After the respondent shows





    that the requirements of a valid notification are met, the

    onus shifts to the applicant.    The applicant is bound to

    dislodge the opinion of the Government and if he fails to

    do so, the Notification must be sustained; (vi) The
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:25 :::
AJN
22
intention prescribed by the relevant Sections of the
IPC
can be gathered from the language, contents and import




                                            
    of the offending material and standard of proof is of lesser

    strictness; (vii) The test is whether the book read as a




                                           
    whole attracts the relevant penal provisions of the
IPC
.
Throughout the book scurrilous and malicious statements




                                    
    have been made by the applicant to outrage the religious
                       
    feelings of the Muslim community; (viii) The two classes in

    the Notification are identified as Muslims and Non-Muslims
                      
    and hence
Section 153-A
of the IPC is attracted.                  The

    applicant calls upon Hindus to protect themselves against
        


    the alleged ordainment of Islam upon all Muslims to kill or
     



    convert Non-Muslims. Hence, the book clearly attracts

    Section 153-B(1)(b) and (c) of the
IPC
; (ix) The applicant's





    case that the book contains matter which is part of

    folklore, tradition, history; that the author has merely





    relied on contents of other books to substantiate his view;
that his interpretation is supported by several Ayats in the

    Holy Quaran must be rejected because the passages of

    the Quaran are torn out of context and the book is a
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:25 :::
AJN
23
deliberate misreading of the Quaran solely to promote




                                                                      
    feelings of ill-will through publication in the guise of




                                             
    political thesis or historical truth. Even truth is no defence

    to a charge under Section 153-A, 153-B or 295-A of the




                                            
    IPC; (x) The plea that the book was published in 2003 and

    till its forfeiture there has not been a single instance of




                                     
    violence or disturbance of law and order so as to warrant
                        
    forfeiture is not tenable; (xi) the applicant not having

    raised the plea of limitation in the application, he may not
                       
    be permitted to raise it at this stage; [Narne Murthy v.
Ravula (2005) 6 SCC 614 and Municipal Corporation
        


    v.    Sri Niyamatullah (1969) 2 SCC 551] (xii)                      The
     



    validity of Section 95 of the Code has been upheld by the

    Supreme Court in Baragur and the contention that there





    has been a violation of the principles of natural justice

    must be rejected.     The power under Section 95 of the





    Code is preventive and not punitive. Section 95 does not

    contemplate any hearing prior to the taking of a decision,

    for that may defeat the purpose of Section 95 of the Code.
Section 96 of the Code provides a post decisional
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:25 :::
AJN
24
challenge.   The aggrieved person has an opportunity to




                                                                      
    assail the order of forfeiture; (xiii) The restrictions placed




                                             
    on the exercise of powers under Section 95 of the Code

    are reasonable restrictions under
Article 19(2)
of the




                                            
    Constitution. The term `in the interest of public order' as

    mentioned in
Article 19(2)
is of a very wide amplitude and




                                     
    includes restrictions imposed by Section 95 of the Code;
(xiv) The constitutional validity of
Section 295-A
of the IPC

    has been upheld by the Supreme Court in Ramji Lal
                      
    Modi, The doctrine of `clear and present danger' invoked

    by the applicant cannot be imported in the Indian
        


    Constitution;   (xv) The petitioner's reliance on Balwant
     



    Singh and Manzhar Khan is misplaced because they

    were cases where offence was registered under
Section





    153-A
of the IPC wherein the degree of proof required to

    establish mens rea is greater than in cases where a





    publication is forfeited under Section 95 of the Code.
Considering the constitutional mandate of adherence to

    the principles of secularism, this court should strike a

    balance between protecting the fundamental right of
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:25 :::
AJN
25
freedom of speech on one hand and public interest on the




                                                                           
    other and dismiss the application.
13. Since the interveners were allowed to intervene for a




                                                  
    limited purpose, we do not propose to deal with the

    submissions     which     travel      beyond       the       scope          of




                                         
    intervention.    It is urged that the courts may refer to

    religious
                        
                scriptures    but    should    not        put       its     own

    interpretation over the text or scriptures. The Constitution
                       
    protects freedom of conscience and when a question

    arises as to what constitutes essential part of religion, the
        


    same should be primarily ascertained with reference to
     



    the doctrine of that religion.
14. When this court has to perform its duty in terms of

    Section 95(1) read with Section 96(4), to consider whether





    a declaration of forfeiture of any book is to be set aside or

    not and when that book happens to be a critical analysis

    of a religion,    an     overview     of religious         tenets        and

    philosophy by the court becomes inevitable. We are not
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:25 :::
AJN
26
for a moment contemplating importing our own views on




                                                                      
    the scriptures.    We shall deal with the rival submissions




                                              
    keeping in mind the judgments cited by Mr. Muchhala.
Mr. Muchhala has taken us through the relevant Ayats and




                                             
    explained their context. As and when necessary, we shall

    refer to Mr. Muchhala's submissions.
15. Another
                         
                      intervenor,    Mr.   Khandelwal,          who         is

    appearing in person has raised an objection to our
                        
    allowing Mr. Muchhala to intervene.
In this connection, he

    has relied on an unreported judgment of the Supreme
        


    Court dated 30/8/1999 in
Shiv Kumar                  v.     Hukum
     



    Chand & Anr.        In
that case, the appellant/complainant

    wanted the counsel appointed by him to conduct the





    prosecution in the Sessions Court. The public prosecutor

    had consented to it. The High Court rejected the prayer.
After considering the relevant provisions of the Code,

    particularly Section 301 thereof, the Supreme Court

    endorsed the High Court's view after observing that the

    prosecution in a Sessions Case cannot be conducted by
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:25 :::
AJN
27
anyone other than the public prosecutor.             The Supreme




                                                                        
    Court observed that if a private counsel is allowed a free




                                                
    hand to conduct a prosecution he would focus on bringing

    the case to conviction even if it is not a fit case where the




                                               
    accused could be convicted.          That is the reason why

    Parliament     has   subjected     his   role   strictly       to      the




                                      
    instructions   given   by   the    public   prosecutor.              This
                         
    Judgment has no application to the present case. Here we

    are not concerned with Sessions trial, nor have we
                        
    allowed Mr. Muchhala to intervene so as to act as counsel

    for the State.   We have already clarified that we have
        


    allowed Mr. Muchhala to intervene with a view to getting
     



    suitable assistance in finding out the true meaning and

    content of the relevant Ayats. Beyond that, he has no role





    to play. It is pertinent to note that since we allowed the

    intervention of the organizations represented by Mr.





    Muchhala, in the interest of justice, we also allowed the

    intervention application of Mr. Khandelwal. The objection

    raised by Mr. Khandelwal is, therefore, rejected.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:25 :::
AJN
28
16. Mr. Khandelwal has tendered written submissions.
They are in tune with Mr. Cama's submissions.                     Mr.




                                           
    Khandelwal has inter alia contended that in the book, not

    a word is stated by the author to instigate Hindus to




                                          
    violence.   According to Mr. Khandelwal, the book is

    banned by self appointed arbiters who have decided what




                                    
    to read and what not to read. He submitted that the book
                      
    contains fair criticism of Islam. Mr. Khandelwal has cited

    instances of books like "Shivaji the Hindu King in Islamic
                     
    India" and "Da Vinci Code" and films like "Jodha Akbar",

    "War and Peace" and "Chand Bujh Gaya" where the High
        


    Court and the Supreme Court have zealously guarded
     



    freedom of speech and expression of people by not

    approving bans on those books or films. According to Mr.





    Khandelwal, in the present case, the ban has not been

    imposed on valid constitutional grounds, but is imposed to





    serve the interests of different political and religious

    groups.
17. Before we examine the present case in the light of
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:25 :::
AJN
29
the judgments cited before us, it is necessary to deal with




                                                                       
    the point of limitation which was raised by counsel for the




                                               
    applicant during the course of hearing. He submitted that

    the book was published in 2002. Hence, the prosecution




                                              
    of the applicant is barred under Section 468 of the Code.
This point is not raised in the application nor is it taken in




                                      
    the written submissions. Though Section 468 of the Code
                        
    prescribes period of limitation, under Section 473 of the

    Code, cognizance of the offence can be taken after the
                       
    expiry of period of limitation, if the court is satisfied in the

    facts and circumstances of the case that the delay is
        


    properly explained.     In this case, the point having not
     



    been raised, the respondents could not have explained

    the delay.     We find substance in learned Advocate





    General's    submissions    based    on   judgments            of     the

    Supreme Court in Narne Murthy and Sri Niyamatullah,





    that the question of limitation being a mixed question of

    law and fact the plea must be pleaded and raised at the

    outset. In the circumstances, we reject this submission.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:25 :::
AJN
30
18. We must also reject the submission based on




                                                                      
    Nawabkhan that action under Section 95 of the Code




                                              
    was taken in violation of principles of natural justice. In

    Nawabkhan,      the   Supreme     Court      set       aside         the




                                             
    externment order passed against the accused on the

    ground that there was a failure to give him a hearing




                                    
    under
Section 59
of the Bombay Police Act.
Section 59
of
                       
    the Bombay Police Act contemplates a hearing.
Section

    95
of the Code does not provide for a hearing. Therefore,
                      
    Nawabkhan cannot be applied to the present case.
Moreover, the legislature has taken care to protect the
        


    aggrieved person from arbitrary orders of forfeiture by
     



    providing a post-decisional challenge under
Section 96
of

    the Code.   The intention of the legislature in enacting
Section 95
is to empower the State Government to deal

    with an emergent situation which is likely to lead to





    breach of public order. If the submission of the applicant

    is accepted that will frustrate the object behind Section
95. This submission of must, therefore, fail.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:25 :::
AJN
31
19. We shall now turn to the judgments cited by learned




                                                                         
    counsel.
20. In Ramji Modi, the Supreme Court was dealing with




                                                
    a challenge to the constitutional validity of
Section 295-A
of the IPC. It was, inter alia, argued that insults to religion




                                        
    or the religious beliefs of a class of citizens of India may
                          
    lead to public disorder in some cases but in many cases

    they may not do so and, therefore, a law which imposes
                         
    restrictions on the citizens' freedom of speech and

    expression by simply making insult to religion an offence
        


    will cover both varieties of insults i.e. those which may
     



    lead to public disorders as well as those which may not. It

    was argued that the law insofar as it covers the first





    variety may be said to have been enacted in the interests

    of public order within the meaning of Clause (2) of
Article





    19
, but insofar as it covers the remaining variety will not

    fall within that clause. The Supreme Court rejected this

    submission and observed that in the first place, Clause (2)

    of
Article   19
protects   a    law   imposing       reasonable
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:25 :::
AJN
32
restrictions on the exercise of the right to freedom of




                                                                     
    speech and expression "in the interest of public order",




                                             
    which is much wider than "for maintenance of public

    order". If, therefore, certain activities have a tendency to




                                            
    cause public disorder, a law penalising such activities as

    an offence cannot but be held to be a law imposing




                                     
    reasonable restriction "in the interest of order" although
                       
    in some cases those activities may not actually lead to a

    breach of public order. The Supreme Court observed that
                      
    Section 295-A does not penalize any and every act of

    insult to or attempt to insult the religion or the religious
        


    beliefs of a class of citizens but it penalises only those
     



    acts of insults to or those varieties of attempts to insult

    the religion or the religious beliefs of a class of citizens





    which are perpetrated with the deliberate and malicious

    intention of outraging the religious feelings of that class.
It was further observed that insults to religion offered

    unwittingly or carelessly or without any deliberate or

    malicious intention to outrage the religious feelings of that

    class do not come within the section. It only punishes the
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:25 :::
AJN
33
aggravated    form   of   insult   to   religion     when          it    is




                                                                       
    perpetrated with the deliberate and malicious intention of




                                               
    outraging the religious feelings of that class.
21. In Harnam, a Constitution Bench of the Supreme

    Court was considering somewhat similar provisions of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1898 ("the Code of 1898").
The Government of U.P. had passed an order under

    Section 99-A of the Code of 1898 forfeiting two books on
                        
    the ground that they contained matter, the publication of

    which was punishable under
Sections 153-A
and
295-A
of
        


    the IPC. The Supreme Court set aside the notification on
     



    the ground that for a forfeiture notification to be valid,

    there must be an opinion of the Government and the





    Government has to state the grounds of its opinion. The

    Supreme Court observed that the notification did not state





    the grounds of the Government's opinion.                It was not

    known which communities were alienated from each other

    or whose religious beliefs had been wounded and why the

    Government thought that such alienation or offence to
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:25 :::
AJN
34
religion had been caused. The Supreme Court observed




                                                                      
    that if the grounds of opinion are not stated, the order of




                                             
    forfeiture must be set aside, because then the Court

    cannot be satisfied that the grounds given by the




                                            
    Government justified the order. The Supreme Court

    clarified that it is the duty of the High Court to set aside




                                     
    an order of forfeiture if it is not satisfied that the grounds
                       
    on which the Government formed its opinion could justify

    that opinion, but it is not the duty of the High Court to find
                      
    for itself whether the book contained any such matter

    whatsoever.   The Supreme Court observed that whether
        


    the order was proper or not would depend only on the
     



    merits of the grounds on which it was based because if it

    could be upheld on the grounds other than those on which





    the Government based its opinion there would have been

    no need to provide that the grounds of the Government's





    opinion should be stated; such grounds would then have

    been wholly irrelevant in judging the validity of the order.
The Supreme Court set aside Allahabad High Court's order

    which had proceeded to examine the book in question for
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:25 :::
AJN
35
itself   and    come to its own           conclusion       dehors         the




                                                                           
    notification as to why the contents of the book were




                                                   
    objectionable.
22. In Narayan Das, the appellant, a proprietor of a

    printing press had published a book entitled "Madhyamic




                                        
    Bhoogol"       written   by   one   Mr.    Saxena.          The       State
                             
    Government passed an order under
Section 2
of the

    Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1961 in respect of the said
                            
    book and two other books stating that the books question

    the territorial integrity and frontiers of India in a manner
        


    which is likely to be prejudicial to the interest of the safety
     



    and security of India and, hence, the State Government

    declares every copy of the said books to be forfeited in





    favour of the Government.           The books were specified in

    the schedule. In respect of the appellant's books it was





    stated inter alia that the books contain maps which show

    incorrect external boundaries of India and some parts of

    India were even omitted from the said maps.
Section 4(1)
of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1961, also required
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:26 :::
AJN
36
the State Government to declare grounds of its opinion in




                                                                    
    the order. The Supreme Court set aside the said order.
The Supreme Court observed that grounds must be

    distinguished from the opinion as grounds of the opinion




                                           
    must mean conclusion of facts on which the opinion is

    based and there can be no conclusion of facts which has




                                     
    no reference to or is not ex facie based on any facts. The
                       
    Supreme Court observed that mere repetition of an

    opinion or reproduction of the section without giving any
                      
    indication of the facts will not answer the requirements of

    a valid notification.   The Supreme Court referred, with
        


    approval, to the judgment of the Calcutta High Court in
Arun Ranjan Ghose v.         State of West Bengal
, 59

    EWN 495, where the Calcutta High Court has observed





    that   formation   of   an   opinion   by   Government                is

    undoubtedly the ground for the action taken by it, but the





    grounds of opinion are obviously different. Grounds must

    necessarily be the import or the effect or the tendency of

    the matters contained in the offending publication, either

    as a whole or in portions of it, as illustrated by passages
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:26 :::
AJN
37
which Government may choose. Relying on its judgment




                                                                        
    in Harnam, the Supreme Court set aside the forfeiture




                                                
    order on the ground that the State Government had given

    its opinion and not the grounds of its opinion.
23. In Lalai Singh Yadav, the Government of Uttar




                                       
    Pradesh by an order passed under Section 99-A of the
                         
    Code of 1898 forfeited a book captioned "Ramayan : A

    True Reading" on the ground that it was sacrilegiously,
                        
    outrageously    objectionable       being    deliberately             and

    maliciously intended to outrage the religious feelings of a
        


    class of citizens of India i.e. Hindus by insulting their
     



    religion and religious beliefs and publication whereof is

    punishable   under
Section    295-A
of the IPC.                    This





    notification contained an appendix setting out in tabular

    form, the particulars of the relevant pages and lines in the





    English and Hindi versions which presumably, were the

    materials which were regarded as scandalizing.                          An

    application was made by the respondent who was the

    publisher under Section 99-C of the Code of 1898 to the
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:26 :::
AJN
38
High Court. The Special Bench of the High Court allowed




                                                                   
    the application and quashed the notification on the




                                           
    cground that the State Government did not state the

    grounds of its opinion as required by Section 99-A. The




                                          
    State of U.P. approached the Supreme Court.                 It was

    argued before the Supreme Court that though there is no




                                    
    express enunciation of the grounds of the Government's
                      
    opinion, the appendix makes up for it. It was argued that

    the number of the pages and lines of the offending
                     
    publication supply both the matter and the grounds, the

    latter being so patent, the omission is inconsequential.
The Supreme Court held that when the section says that
     



    you must state the grounds, it is no answer to say that

    they need not be stated because they are implied. The





    Supreme Court clarified that a formal authoritative setting

    forth of the grounds is statutorily mandatory and the





    Court cannot make a roving enquiry beyond the grounds

    set forth in the order and if the grounds are left out

    altogether then there is nothing available to the court to

    examine, and the notification must fail.       The Supreme
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:26 :::
AJN
39
Court observed that the grounds need not be stated at




                                                                     
    `learned length'.   In certain cases, a laconic statement




                                             
    may be enough while in others more detailed reasons

    may be required.     The Supreme Court further observed




                                            
    that while the order may be brief, it cannot be completely

    blank as to the grounds which form the basis of the




                                     
    opinion on which the Government relies.           The Supreme
                        
    Court held that an order of forfeiture constituted a drastic

    restriction on the rights of a citizen and hence the
                       
    relevant provisions of the Code must be strictly construed.
The Supreme Court observed that the relevant provisions
        


    of the Code compel the Government to look into the
     



    matter "which calls for action to consider it as to the clear

    and present danger it constitutes in the shape of





    promoting feelings of enmity and hatred between the

    different segments of citizens or as to its strong tendency





    or intendment to outrage the religious feelings of such

    segments" and to exercise such power it is necessary for

    the State to set out the grounds of its opinion.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:26 :::
AJN
40
24. In Balwant Singh, the Supreme Court was dealing




                                                                   
    with a criminal appeal filed by the appellants challenging




                                           
    the conviction under Section 124-A and
Section 153-A
of

    the IPC.   The Supreme Court acquitted the appellants.
Counsel for the applicant relied on the observations of the

    Supreme Court in regard to
Section 153-A
of the IPC that




                                    
    the intention to cause disorder or to incite people to
                         
    violence is the sine qua non of the offence under
Section

    153-A
of the IPC and the prosecution has to prove the
                        
    existence of mens rea in order to succeed.                Counsel

    submitted that it is for the respondents to first prove
        


    existence of mens rea. He submitted that here there is
     



    total absence of mens rea and, hence, the Notification

    must be set aside.
25. In Manzar Khan, Manzar Khan the appellant was a





    constituted attorney of Oxford University Press India

    which published a book entitled Shivaji Hindu King in

    Islamic India authored by Prof. Laine.              The police

    registered FIR against the appellant and Prof. Laine under
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:26 :::
AJN
41
Sections 153
, 153-A read with
Section 34
of the IPC inter




                                                                   
    alia on the ground that the offensive paragraphs of the




                                           
    said book contained scurrilous attack on Shivaji Maharaj

    and the circulation of the said book has resulted in




                                          
    causing enmity between various communities and has led

    to violence and disharmony. While quashing the FIR, the




                                   
    Supreme Court observed that the gist of the offence
                      
    under
Section 153-A
of the IPC is the intention to promote

    feelings of enmity or hatred between different classes of
                     
    people.   The intention to cause disorder or incite the

    people to violence is the sine qua non of the offence
        


    under
Section 153-A
of the IPC and the prosecution has to
     



    prove prima facie the existence of mens rea on the part of

    the accused.   The Supreme Court further observed that





    the intention has to be judged primarily by the language

    of the book and the circumstances in which the book was





    written and published.     The Supreme Court further

    observed that the matter complained of must be read as a

    whole. One cannot rely on strongly worded and isolated

    passages for proving the charge nor indeed can one take
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:26 :::
AJN
42
a sentence here and a sentence there and connect them




                                                                    
    by a meticulous process of inferential reasoning. The




                                            
    Supreme Court quoted with approval the observations of

    the Nagpur High Court in Bhagwati Charan Shukla that




                                           
    the effect of the words in the offending publication must

    be judged from the point of view of a reasonable man, and




                                    
    not a weak or a hypersensitive man who senses hostility
                       
    in every point of view that does not agree with his own.
26. In Baragur, the State of Karnataka had issued a

    notification forfeiting all copies of novel "Dharmakaarma"
under
Section 95
of the Code on the ground that some of
     



    the statements made therein were objectionable and

    insulting to the sentiments and feelings of the followers of





    Basaveshwara, a great saint.     The forfeiture was upheld

    by the Supreme Court by observing that some portions of





    the book were clearly an affront to the sentiments of

    Veerashaivas followers of Basaveshwara.         The Supreme

    Court observed that
Section 95
of the Code exemplifies

    the principle that the freedom of speech and expression is
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:26 :::
AJN
43
not unfettered. This freedom must be available to all and




                                                                     
    no person has a right to impinge on the feeling of others




                                             
    on the premise that his right to freedom of speech

    remains unrestricted and unfettered. The Supreme Court




                                            
    observed that India is a country with vast disparities in

    language,   culture   and   religion   and    unwanted             and




                                     
    malicious criticism or interference in the faith of others

    cannot be accepted.
ig  The Supreme Court observed that

    prior to the issuance of a notification, it must appear to
                     
    the State Government that the ingredients of the offence

    under the relevant provisions of the
IPC
exist.                   Only
        


    thereafter does the onus shift on the author.                      The
     



    Supreme Court made it clear that the State cannot extract

    stray sentences of portions of the book and come to a





    finding that the book as a whole ought to be forfeited.
The Supreme Court observed that if the allegations made





    in the allegedly offending portions of the publication were

    based on folklore, tradition or history, something in

    extenuation could be said for the author.          However, on

    facts, the Supreme Court found that Chapter 12 of the
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:26 :::
AJN
44
book was not in sync with the rest of the novel and had




                                                                    
    been deliberately designed to be hurtful and to bring the




                                            
    Basaveshwara family to shame.
27. We must also refer to Bhagwati Charan Shukla. In

    that case, orders of forfeiture were made in respect of




                                    
    certain matters which appeared in Nagpur Times.                   The
                        
    question was whether it directly or indirectly brought into

    hatred or contempt the Government established by law in
                       
    British India or excited disaffection    towards the said

    Government. The Nagpur High Court set aside the order
        


    of forfeiture.   The Nagpur High Court observed that the
     



    words of the relevant section are words of wide import

    and that unless they are applied with restraint and care





    almost every criticism of Government would fall within

    their purview. The Nagpur High Court observed that it is





    not sedition to merely criticize the Government and it is

    not sedition to seek its overthrow by constitutional means

    in order that another Government equally constitutional

    may be substituted in its place in a constitutional way. In
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:26 :::
AJN
45
order to constitute the offence of sedition, the intention or




                                                                     
    the attempt to induce people to cease to obey the law and




                                             
    to cease to uphold the lawful authority must be present.
While considering whether the published material was




                                            
    intended to excite disaffection towards the Government,

    the Nagpur High Court considered the fact that the matter




                                     
    appeared in a local daily written in English with a small
                       
    and distinctly limited circulation. It was observed that the

    paper was read by those who understand English and
                      
    who, therefore, have a certain degree of education. It was

    not meant for an ignorant illiterate and inflammable mob.
In relation to the right to criticize the Government,
     



    learned Judges observed that they did not necessarily say

    that the criticisms were well founded, but it must be





    acknowledged that there was a constitutional right to put

    forth such criticisms.
28. In Gopal V. Godse, G.V. Godse, the petitioner was

    the brother of Nathuram Godse, assassin of Mahatma

    Gandhi. The petitioner was arrested along with Nathuram
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:26 :::
AJN
46
Godse for murder of Mahatma Gandhi and was tried along




                                                                    
    with him. He was sentenced to life imprisonment. He was




                                            
    released from jail on 13/10/1964. He wrote and published

    a book titled "Gandhi-hatya Ani Mee".          On 6/12/1967,




                                           
    Governor of Delhi issued a notification under Section 99-A

    of the Code of 1898 forfeiting every copy of the said book




                                    
    on the ground that it contains matter which promotes
                      
    feelings of enmity and hatred between Hindus and

    Muslims, the publication of which is punishable under
Section 153-A
of the IPC. On 1/2/1968, the Government of

    Maharashtra republished the notification of the Delhi
        


    Administration.    The   petitioner   challenged        the      said
     



    notification under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India

    and under Section 99-D of the Code of 1898. The Special





    Bench set aside the notification. The Special Bench

    observed that the High Court cannot sustain an order of





    forfeiture on grounds other than those mentioned in the

    said order.   The High Court cannot add to the grounds

    given by the State in the notification, but can simply

    review the book on merits, to determine if it is satisfied
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:26 :::
AJN
47
with the grounds given in the order of forfeiture.
Following are the points which according to the Special




                                            
    Bench must be kept in mind before inquiring whether a

    charge can be sustained on the date disclosed in the




                                           
    order of forfeiture.
"64. While inquiring whether such a charge
            can be sustained on the date disclosed in
                           
            the order of forfeiture, namely the
            offending passages read in the context of
            the book as a whole, it is important to
                          
            remember that : (1) Under Section 153A it
            is not necessary to prove that as a result of
            the objectionable matter, enmity or hatred
            was in fact caused between the different
        


            classes. (2) Intention to promote enmity or
            hatred apart from what appears from the
     



            writing itself, is not a necessary ingredient
            of the offence. It is enough to show that
            the language of the writing is of a nature
            calculated to promote feelings of enmity or





            hatred for, a person must be presumed to
            intend the natural consequences of his act.
            (3) The matter charged as being within the
            mischief of Section 153A must be read as a





            whole. One cannot rely on stray, isolated
            passages for proving the charge nor indeed
            can one take a sentence here and a
            sentence there and connect them by a
            meticulous process of inferential reasoning.
            (4) For judging what are the natural or
            probable consequences of the writing, it is
            permissible to take into consideration the
            class of readers for whom the book is
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:26 :::
AJN
48
primarily meant as also the state of feelings




                                                                      
           between      the    different     classes     or
           communities at the relevant time. (5) If the
           writing is calculated to promote feelings of




                                              
           enmity or hatred, it is no defence to a
           charge under Section 153A that the writing
           contains a truthful account of past events
           or is otherwise supported by good




                                             
           authority. If a writer is disloyal to history, it
           might be easier to prove that history was
           distorted in order to achieve a particular
           end as e.g. to promote feelings of enmity or




                                     
           hatred between different classes or
           communities. But adherence to the strict
                       
           path of history is not by itself a complete
           defence to a charge under Section 153A. In
           fact, greater the truth, greater the impact
                      
           of the writing on the minds of its readers, if
           the writing is otherwise calculated to
           produce mischief."
29. In M/s. Varsha Publications Pvt. Ltd., the State of

    Maharashtra issued Notification dated 31/7/1982 under
Section 92
of the Code of Criminal Procedure (2 of 1974)

    (for short, "Code of 1974") declaring the issue of a





    popular Marathi Daily "Shree" forfeited on the ground that

    it contained matters which would be punishable under
Section 153-A
of the IPC. The notification stated that the

    said publication and its cover contain matter which

    purports to prove that in Pre-Islamic times the ancient
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:26 :::
AJN
49
Indian culture and Hindu religion were in vogue in Arabia




                                                                          
    and that the Islamic religion, culture and art were greatly




                                                  
    influenced by the Indian culture and religion and which

    thereby promotes on the grounds of religion and race




                                                 
    disharmony or ill-will between the Muslim and Hindu

    communities and commits an act which is prejudicial to




                                     
    the maintenance of harmony between the said two
                         
    communities and which is likely to disturb the public

    tranquility.   The   publisher    of    the      said      publication
                        
    challenged the notification.      It was argued that the

    notification must state the grounds on the basis of which
        


    the State Government has formed its opinion that the
     



    issue in question contained matter which is punishable

    under
Section 153-A
of the IPC.        In the absence of such





    grounds, the Notification will be bad in law.
30. The Special Bench of this Court referred to the

    judgments of the Supreme Court in Harnam Das and in

    Lalai Singh Yadav and held that the notification                           in

    question did not contain any grounds; that mere mention
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:26 :::
AJN
50
of the article or a part thereof in the notification would not




                                                                      
    constitute grounds contemplated by
Section 95
and




                                             
    therefore, it would be difficult for the State to contend

    that the notification stated grounds and had complied




                                            
    with the mandatory provisions of law. The Special Bench

    took note of the fact that it was stated in the petition that




                                     
    just below the printed article, there was a list containing
                       
    various books to which the author has made a reference.
It was contended that the article was a historical and
                      
    literary composition made in        a temperate language.
Truth of the averments made in the petition were not
        


    denied. After analyzing the article, the Special Bench held
     



    that it will be very difficult for the State to contend that a

    narration of history would promote violence, enmity and





    hatred. The Special Bench observed that if such a

    contention is accepted, a day will come when that part of





    history which is unpalatable to a particular religion will

    have to be kept in cold storage on the pretext that

    publication of such history would constitute an offence

    punishable under
Section 153-A
of the IPC.                 A nation
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:26 :::
AJN
51
would have to forget it's own history and in due course




                                                                    
    nation will have no history at all.   The writing being a




                                            
    historical research, observed this court, it cannot be

    allowed to be thwarted on a plea that publication of such




                                           
    material would be hit by
Section 153-A
of the IPC.               This

    court in the circumstances, quashed the notification.
31. In Anant Dighe, the Government of Maharashtra

    issued notification under
Section 95(1)
of the Code
                       
    declaring that every copy of the Marathi play entitled

    "Mee Nathuram Godse Bolto" be             forfeited to the
        


    Government.    The notification inter alia stated that the
     



    play in question contained derogatory references towards

    Mahatma Gandhi and certain communities and was likely





    to disturb public tranquility and that it was written with a

    deliberate and malicious intention to outrage feelings of





    the followers of Mahatma Gandhi and therefore, the

    publication would be punishable under
Section 153-A
and
295-A
of the IPC.   The challenge to the notification was

    repelled by the Special Bench of this court, to which one
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:26 :::
AJN
52
of    us   (D.Y.   Chandrachud,    J.)   was    a     party.           After




                                                                           
    considering the relevant judgments, this court observed




                                                   
    that the notification did not contain grounds of the

    Government's opinion. The notification did not state what




                                                  
    part of the play would render the printed material

    punishable under Section 153-A or the groups between




                                      
    whom feeling of enmity is likely to be created.                          The
                          
    notification had merely employed statutory language.
There was no reference in the notification of there being
                         
    any deliberate or malicious intention of outraging the

    religious feelings of any class of citizens. This court noted
        


    that lacunae in the notification cannot be permitted to be
     



    supplemented in the affidavits filed in the course of

    proceedings.       While stressing the importance of the





    guarantee of freedom of speech and expression under
Article 19(1)(a)
of the Constitution, this court observed as





    under:
"But, it is important to realize that there
                are eternal     values on which the
                Constitution of a democracy is founded.
                Tolerance of a diversity of view points and
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:26 :::
AJN
53
the acceptance of the freedom to express




                                                                         
                 of those whose thinking may not accord
                 with the mainstream are cardinal values
                 which lie at the very foundation of a




                                                 
                 democratic form of Government.               A
                 society wedded to the Rule of law, cannot
                 trample upon the rights of those who
                 assert views which may be regarded as




                                                
                 unpopular or contrary to the views shared
                 by a majority. The law does not have to
                 accept the views which have been
                 expressed by the petitioner in the play in




                                        
                 order to respect the right of the petitioner
                 as a playwright to express those views.
Respect for and tolerance of a diversity of
                 viewpoints is what ultimately sustains a
                 democratic society and Government. The
                         
                 right of the playwright, of the artist, writer
                 and of the poet will be reduced to husk if
                 the freedom to portray a message -
                 whether it be in canvas, prose or verse is
        


                 to depend upon the popular perception of
                 the acceptability of that message. Popular
     



                 perceptions,    however     strong     cannot
                 override values which the Constitution
                 embodies as guarantees of freedom in
                 what was always intended to be a free





                 society."
32. Reference was also made to the judgment of the

    Special Bench of this Court in
Sangharaj Rupawate &

    Ors. v. Nitin Gadre & Ors.
in Writ Petition No.1721

    of    2004     decided    on    26/4/2007.         In     that      case,

    notification was issued by the Government of Maharashtra
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:26 :::
AJN
54
forfeiting every copy of the book captioned "Shivaji-Hindu




                                                                       
    King in Islamic India" written by Prof. Laine on the ground




                                               
    that publication of the book was punishable under
Section

    153-A
of the IPC.      After the petition was heard by this




                                              
    court, the Supreme Court held that the writings in the said

    book did not constitute an offence under
Section 153-A
of




                                       
    the IPC. In view of this observation of the Supreme Court,
                          
    this court held that the notification has to be struck down.
This court also held that there was nothing on record to
                         
    show     that   the   publication   was   likely     to      promote

    disharmony or feeling of enmity between various groups
        


    as likely to cause disturbance of public tranquility and
     



    maintenance of harmony between various groups.
33. Before we deal with the rival contentions, it is

    necessary to deduce the legal principles from the above





    judgments. Following are the said principles.
"a)   The Notification must state the grounds of
                 the Government's opinion.
(Harnam, Narayan Das, Lalai Singh Yadav)
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:26 :::
AJN
55
b)   A formal authoritative setting forth of the
               grounds is statutorily mandatory. Appendix




                                                     
               cannot make up for grounds of opinion.
(Lalai Singh Yadav)




                                                    
          c)   Mere      repetition        of   an      opinion           or
reproduction of the Section will not answer




                                          
               the requirement of a valid notification.
ig                         (Narayan Das)
d)   Grounds must not be stated at learned
               length.      In    certain       cases      a     laconic
               statement may be enough while in others
        


               more detailed reasons may be required.
Grounds may be brief but cannot be blank.
(Lalai Singh Yadav)
e)   Grounds of opinion must mean conclusion
               of facts on which the opinion is based.
               Grounds must necessarily be the import or





               the effect or the tendency of the matters
               contained     in   the      offending      publication
               either as a whole or in portions of it, as
               illustrated by passages which Government
               may choose,
               (Narayan Das's case where the Supreme
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:26 :::
AJN
56
Court referred to the Calcutta High Court's




                                                                         
               judgment     in   Arun   Ranjan      Ghose         with
               approval).
f)   The High Court must set aside an order of
               forfeiture if there are no grounds of opinion




                                                
               because if there are no grounds of opinion,
               it cannot be satisfied that the grounds




                                       
               given by the Government justified the
               order.   If in such case, the High Court
                        
               upholds the order, it would mean that the
               High Court itself made the order which the
                       
               High Court cannot do.                     (Harnam)
g)   The High Court must set aside the order of
               forfeiture if it is not satisfied that the
     



               grounds on which the Government formed
               it's opinion justify that opinion.
(Harnam)
h)   The validity of the order of forfeiture would
               depend on the merits of the grounds. It is





               not the duty of the High Court to find out
               for itself whether the book contained any
               such matter whatsoever.       The High Court
               cannot make a roving enquiry beyond the
               grounds set forth in the order.          (Harnam)
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:26 :::
AJN
57
i)   The State cannot extract stray sentences of
               portions of the book and come to a finding




                                                  
               that the said book as a whole ought to be
               forfeited.                                 (Baragur)
j)   The matter charged as being within the
               mischief of the relevant sections of the
IPC
must be read as a whole. One cannot rely
                         
               on stray, isolated passages for proving the
               charge nor indeed can one take a sentence
                        
               here and a sentence there and connect
               them by a meticulous process of inferential
               reasoning.
(Gopal Godse, Special Bench, Bombay High
     



               Court.)
k)
Section 295-A
of the IPC does not penalize





               any and every act of insult to or attempt to
               insult the religion or religious beliefs of a
               class of citizens. There must be a malicious





               or   deliberate   intention   to     outrage          the
               religious feelings of a class of citizens.
               (Ramji Modi, Balwant Singh, Manzar Khan,
               Bhagwati Charan Sharma Nagpur High Court,
               Gopal Godse Special Bench, Bombay High
               Court.)
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:26 :::
AJN
58
l)   Intention of the author has to be gathered
               from the language, contents and import of




                                             
               the offending material.
(Baragur,   Gopal    Godse   Special       Bench,




                                            
               Bombay High Court).
m)   If the purpose of writing the book was a




                                       
               historical research based on a number of
                       
               reference books and other material, it
               would be difficult for the State to contend
                      
               that simple narration of history would
               promote violence, enmity or hatred.
               (Varsha Publications, Special Bench, Bombay
        


               High Court.)
n)   If the allegations made in the offending
               article is based on folklore, tradition or





               history something in extenuation could
               perhaps be said for the author.
(Baragur)
o)   If the writing is calculated to promote
               feelings of enmity or hatred, it is no
               defence to a charge under
Section 153-A
of
               the IPC that the writing contains a truthful
               account of past events or is otherwise
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:26 :::
AJN
59
supported by good authority. Adherence to




                                                                               
               the strict path of history is not by itself a
               complete     defence        to     a   charge         under




                                                      
               Section 153-A.
               (Gopal Godse, Special Bench, Bombay High




                                                     
               Court).
p)
Section 95(1)
of the Code requires that the




                                          
               ingredients of the offences should appear
                         
               to the Government to be present.
Section
               95
does not require that it should be
                        
               proved      to   the        satisfaction         of       the
               Government       that       all    requirements             of
               punishing sections including mens rea were
        


               fully established.
(Baragur,    Nandkishore,         Special      Bench        of

               Patna High Court).
q)   The onus to dislodge the prima facie
               opinion     of   the    Government             that       the
               offending    publication          comes within            the





               relevant offence including its requirement
               of intent is on the applicant and such
               intention has to be gathered from the
               language, contents and import thereof.
               (Nandkishore, Special Bench of Patna High
               Court, approved in Baragur.)
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:26 :::
AJN
60
r)   It is not necessary to prove that as a result




                                                                            
               of the objectionable         matter       enmity         or
               hatred was in fact caused between the




                                                   
               different classes. It is enough to show that
               the language of the writing is of a nature




                                                  
               calculated to promote feelings of enmity or
               hatred.
(Gopal Godse, Special Bench, Bombay High




                                        
               Court.).
s)   For
                          
                     judging    what      are   the     natural         or
probable consequences of the writing, it is
               permissible to take into consideration the
               class of readers for whom the book is
        


               primarily   meant     as    also    the      state       of
     



               feelings between the different classes or
               communities at the relevant time.
(Gopal Godse, Special Bench, Bombay High





               Court.)
t)   Whether the objectionable matter is meant





               for limited circulation, whether it is to cater
               to ignorant, illiterate inflammable mob or
               educated    people      would      be    a    relevant
               consideration.
(Bhagwati Charan Sharma - Nagpur High
               Court).
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:27 :::
AJN
61
u)   The effect of the words must be judged
                 from the standards of reasonable            strong-
minded, firm and courageous men and not
                 those of weak and vacillating minds, nor of




                                                
                 those who scent danger in every hostile
                 point of view.
(
Ramesh    v.    Union of India
, AIR 88 SC 775,




                                          
                 Manzar Khan, Bhagwati Charan Sharma -
                 Nagpur High Court.)"
34. We need to examine the present case in the light of

    above principles.      We shall first deal with the grievance
        

    that because the penal provisions have not been stated in
     



    the Notification, the applicant's right to challenge it is

    adversely affected. We have already noted that learned





    Advocate General has contended that the book contains

    matter, the publication of which would constitute offences

    punishable under Sections 153-A, 153-B and
Section 295-





    A
of the IPC.          We shall, therefore, quote the said

    provisions to the extent they are relevant to the present

    case.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:27 :::
AJN
62
"153-A Promoting enmity between




                                                                      
               different groups on grounds of religion,
               race,    place  of   birth,   residence,
               language, etc. and doing acts prejudicial




                                              
               to maintenance of harmony.
(1)   Whoever -
(a) by words, either spoken or
               written, or by signs or by visible
               representations or otherwise, promotes
               or attempts to promote, on grounds of




                                      
               religion, race, place of birth, residence,
               language, caste or community or any
                        
               other ground whatsoever, disharmony
               or feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-will
               between     different   religious,   racial
                       
               language or regional groups or castes or
               communities, or
(b) commits any act, which is
        


               prejudicial to the maintenance of
               harmony between different religious,
     



               racial, language or regional groups or
               castes or communities and which
               disturbs or is likely to disturb the public
               tranquility, [or]"
Section 153-B so far as it relevant reads thus:
"S.153-B - Imputations, assertions,
               prejudicial to national integration.
(1) Whoever by words either spoken or
               written or by signs or by visible
               representations or otherwise -
(a) makes    or   publishes  any
               imputation that any class of persons
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:27 :::
AJN
63
cannot by reason of their being




                                                                 
          members of any religious, racial,
          language or regional group or caste or
          community,     bear   true     faith  and




                                         
          allegiance to the Constitution of India as
          by law established or uphold the
          sovereignty and integrity of India or
(b)   xxx       xxx       xxx
(c) makes     or    publishes    any
          assertion, counsel, plea or appeal




                                 
          concerning the obligation of any class of
          persons, by reason of their being
                     
          members of any religious, racial,
          language or regional group or caste or
          community,      and     such     assertion,
                    
          counsel, plea or appeal causes or is
          likely to cause disharmony or feeling of
          enmity or hatred or ill-will between such
          members and other persons,
        


          S.295-A Deliberate and malicious acts,
     



          intended to outrage religious feelings of
          any class by insulting its religion or
          religious beliefs -
Whoever, with deliberate and
          malicious intention of outraging the
          religious feelings of any class of
          [citizens of India], by words, either





          spoken or written or by signs or by
          visible representations or otherwise],
          insults or attempts to insult the religion
          or the religious beliefs or that class,
          shall be punished with imprisonment of
          either description for a term which may
          extend to [three years], or with fine or
          with both."
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:27 :::
AJN
64
If we peruse the Notification, we find that though the




                                              
    sections of the
IPC
are not mentioned, there is a direct

    reference to the ingredients of Sections 153-A and 295A in




                                             
    the recitals contained in the Notification.         The relevant

    portion of the Notification reads thus:
"AND WHEREAS for the reasons
                        
             aforesaid the Government of Maharashtra
             is of the opinion that the circulation and
             sale of the said Book and relevant
                       
             translation thereof as the translated Book
             contain     abusive     language      bringing
             meanness to Jihaad, Quaran, Mohammed
             Paigambar, Indian Muslims and conversion,
        


             as well as derogatory and false references
             therein is likely to create hatred against
     



             Muslims in the minds of non-Muslims
             thereby promoting enmity between classes
             so also the said Book and relevant
             translation thereof as the translated Book





             outrages the fillings of a Muslim section of
             society and maliciously insulting the
             religion and religious beliefs of Muslims and
             likely to lead to acts of violence and





             disharmony and that any further circulation
             and sale of the said Book and relevant
             translation thereof as a translated Book is
             likely to result in breach of peace and
             public tranquility between classes and
             groups, as such the said Book and relevant
             translated Book should be forfeited;
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:27 :::
AJN
65
35. Ideally, the relevant sections should be clearly stated




                                            
    in the notification. But, in our opinion, the absence of a

    clear statement of penal provisions is not fatal to the




                                           
    notification in view of the express mention of their

    ingredients in the Notification.   The Supreme Court has




                                    
    made it clear that the notification must state the grounds
                       
    of the Government's opinion and a formal authoritative

    setting forth of the grounds is statutorily mandatory. But
                      
    the Supreme Court has also clarified that a mere

    repetition of an opinion or reproduction of section will not
        


    answer the requirement of valid notification (Narayan
     



    Das). It is also made clear by the Supreme Court that the

    grounds of opinion must mean conclusion of facts on





    which the opinion is based. Grounds must necessarily be

    the import or the effect or the tendency of the matters





    contained in the offending publication either as a whole or

    in portions of it, as illustrated by passages which

    Government may choose (Narayan Das).              Therefore, if

    from conclusions of facts, there is a fair idea of what is
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:27 :::
AJN
66
taken against the author that          may suffice in the




                                                                       
    circumstances of a case. The mere non-mention of penal




                                               
    sections in the Notification by itself is not sufficient to

    throw it overboard.
36. We will now examine whether grounds of opinion are
                       
    stated in the Notification and whether they contain

    conclusions of facts which give sufficient outline of what is
                      
    held against the applicant. We have already reproduced

    the Notification. It is necessary to quote recital 8 again. It
        


    states that "for the reasons aforesaid, the Government of
     



    Maharashtra is of the opinion (emphasis supplied) that the

    circulation and sale of the book and the relevant





    translation thereof as the translated book contain abusive

    language    bringing    meanness      to     Jihaad,          Quaran,





    Mohammed, Paigambar, Indian Muslims and Conversions,

    as well as derogatory and false references therein is likely

    to create hatred against Muslims in the minds of non-
Muslims thereby promoting enmity between classes so
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:27 :::
AJN
67
also the book and relevant translation thereof as the




                                                                        
    translated book outrages the feelings of a Muslim section




                                                
    of society and maliciously insulting the religion and

    religious belief of Muslims and likely to lead to acts of




                                               
    violence and disharmony and that any further circulation

    and sale of the book and relevant translation thereof as a




                                       
    translated book is likely to result in breach of peace and
                        
    public tranquility between classes and groups, as such the

    book   and    the   relevant   translated    book        should         be
                       
    forfeited".
37. It is evident that recital 8 contains the opinion and

    the earlier recitals 1 to 7 contain reasons or grounds of





    opinion to which we shall soon come. The Notification

    therefore cannot be accused of not containing the





    required opinion.
38. We shall now turn to the grounds of opinion. Recital
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:27 :::
AJN
68
2 states that the author of the book has made several




                                                                      
    derogatory and false statements about Muslim religion,




                                              
    community,     priests   and   Mohammed         Paigambar              as

    specified in Schedule appended thereto. Recital 3 quotes




                                             
    the gist of the false statements and gives the relevant

    page numbers.      Similarly, in the 4th recital, reference is




                                       
    made to derogatory and false statements about Jihaad,

    Quaran,    Mohammed
                         ig  Paigambar,    Indian      Muslims          and

    Conversions and recital 4 refers to Khatme Nawabac as
                       
    being Muslim sentiment. In both these recitals, relevant

    page numbers are given. The 5th recital is very important.
It states that "this might raise a question mark about the
     



    basic aim and objective behind writing the book without

    taking the Muslim sentiments into consideration and





    without giving thorough consideration to the subject and

    that the Government has taken serious note of this





    derogatory, tasteless and malicious writings".                     This

    paragraph, in our opinion, contains the conclusions of

    facts.   The 6th recital refers to the article published in a

    newspaper making reference to the book and action taken
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:27 :::
AJN
69
inter alia against the author under Sections 153-A, 295-A




                                                                       
    read with
Section 34
of the IPC.
39. The grounds do not merely quote the pages or rely




                                              
    on the Schedule.        The grounds give the gist of the

    derogatory remarks and to help identify those remarks




                                     
    page   numbers    are    given.      The    Schedule           merely
                       
    supplements the grounds.          The Notification does not

    entirely rest on the Schedule.         In our opinion, the
                      
    Notification answers the test of a valid notification

    inasmuch as it states the opinion of the Government, it
        


    states the grounds of the Government's opinion and
     



    outlines the ingredients of the penal provisions which are

    attracted to the present case. The grounds may be called





    brief. They are certainly not blank. We, therefore, reject

    these submissions of the applicant.
40. Relying on the judgment of the Nagpur High Court in

    Bhagwati    Charan      Shukla, Counsel        submitted            that

    Section 295-A and
Section 153-A
of the IPC cannot be
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:27 :::
AJN
70
applied unless language employed is strictly in terms of




                                                                        
    these sections.      Relying on Gopal Godse's judgment,




                                                
    Counsel submitted that the order of forfeiture must at the

    very best show that the language of the writing is of a




                                               
    nature calculated to promote feelings of enmity and

    hatred. Counsel submitted that the Notification falls short




                                       
    of this requirement and, hence, must be set aside.
41. There can be no debate over the legal propositions.
But, the law does not require verbatim reproduction of the

    section. In our opinion, the Notification does not lack the
        


    basic ingredients.    The Notification identifies the classes
     



    of people who are likely to be affected by the book as

    Muslims and non-Muslims.            It quotes the derogatory





    references to Muslim religion and inter alia states that the

    said references are likely to create hatred against Muslims





    in the minds of non-Muslims thereby promoting enmity

    between    classes.     It   further   states   that       the      book

    maliciously insults Muslim religion which is likely to lead to

    acts of violence and disharmony and breach of peace and
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:27 :::
AJN
71
public tranquility between classes.         In view of these




                                                                       
    averments, it is not possible for us to accept this




                                               
    submission of the applicant.
42. Connected with this is the submission that mens rea

    or intention to cause disorder or to incite people being the




                                       
    sine   qua   non   for   the   relevant   offences        it   is     the
                        
    respondents, who have to prove the mens rea. Reliance

    was placed by Counsel on Balwant Singh where the
                       
    Supreme Court has observed that the intention to cause

    disorder or to incite people to violence being the sine qua
        


    non of the offence under
Section 153-A
of the IPC, the
     



    prosecution has to prove mens rea in order to succeed.
Reliance was also placed on Manzar Khan for this





    proposition. In our opinion, reliance placed on the above

    judgments is misplaced.
43. Balwant Singh will not be applicable to the present

    case because there the Supreme Court was dealing with a

    criminal appeal filed by the appellants challenging their
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:27 :::
AJN
72
conviction under Section 124-A and
Section 153-A
of the




                                                                       
    IPC.   The Supreme Court acquitted the appellants.
Standard of proof required in a criminal trial can never be

    equated to the requirement of presence of mens rea or




                                              
    malicious intention to sustain an order of forfeiture issued

    under
Section 95
of the Code. In this connection,




                                      
    reference must be made to the judgment of the Special
                         
    Bench of Patna High Court in Nand Kishore Singh                         v.
State of Bihar & Anr. AIR 1986 Patna 98.                       In that
                        
    case, the Government of Bihar had issued a notification

    under
Section 95(1)
of the Code banning copies of a book
        


    on the ground that it contained objectionable matters and
     



    derogatory references about Prophet Mohammed which

    outraged the religious feelings of the Muslim community





    which was an offence punishable under
Section 295-A
of

    the IPC.     The petitioner who challenged the notification





    was the publisher of the book. It was argued that to be an

    offence under Section 295-A, the publication must be with

    a deliberate and malafide intention.           The mens rea or

    deliberate    and   mala   fide    intention    must        be       first
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:27 :::
AJN
73
established. Negativating this submission, the Patna High




                                                                    
    Court observed as under:
"... it would be somewhat fallacious to
               mathematically equate the proceedings




                                           
               under
Sections 95
and
96
of the Code with
               a trial under Section 295-A of the Penal
               Code with the accused in the dock. The
               stringent requirement of the mens rea to




                                     
               be proved and established are for the
               purpose of a conviction under this offence
                        
               which carried a sentence upto three years
               and fine".
The Patna High Court further observed :
"Indeed to require that a deliberate
        


               and malicious intention must be proved at
               the    threshold     stage    before    the
     



               Government by evidence (including any
               rebuttal thereof) as a condition for acting
               under
Section 95(1)
, as if an accused
               person who was in the dock, would in





               effect virtually frustrate the preventive
               purpose of the said section".
It was further observed :
"The onus to dislodge and rebut the
               prima facie opinion of the Government that
               the offending publication comes within the
               ambit of the relevant offence including its
               requirement of intent is on the applicant
               and such intention has to be gathered from
               the language, contents and import
               thereof."
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:27 :::
AJN
74
44. It may be stated here that in Baragur, the Supreme




                                           
    Court has quoted the above observations with approval

    and observed that
Sections 95
and
96
of the Code are




                                          
    preventive in nature.
Section 95
does not by itself create

    a criminal offence and the reference to various sections of




                                    
    the
IPC
is merely descriptive of the kind of offence which
                       
    need to be prevented by a declaration under
Section 95
.
45. For the same reasons, judgment of the Supreme

    Court in Manzar Khan will not be applicable to the
        


    present case. In that case, the police had registered FIR
     



    under
Sections 153
, 153-A read with
Section 34
of the IPC

    against the author and the publisher of a book which





    allegedly contained scurrilous attack on Shivaji Maharaj, a

    historical hero.   The Supreme Court observed that the





    prosecution has to prima facie prove the existence of

    mens rea on the part of the accused. The Supreme Court

    referred to its judgment in
State of Haryana v. Bhajan

    Lal
, AIR 1992 SC 604, where it is laid down that an FIR
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:27 :::
AJN
75
can be quashed if it does not disclose an offence and




                                                                        
    obviously after coming to the conclusion that the FIR did




                                                
    not disclose any offence at all, the Supreme Court,

    quashed it. Facts of this case materially differ from the




                                               
    facts of the present case. Parameters of a criminal trial or

    of requirements of the FIR on which investigation can be




                                      
    set into motion cannot be applied to this case. As stated
                        
    by the Special Bench of the Patna High Court in Nand

    Kishore Singh, all that
Section 95(1)
requires is that the
                       
    ingredients   of   the   offence   should      appear          to      the

    Government to be present and not that they should be
        


    proved at the threshold or that the Government should be
     



    inflexibly satisfied about them. Therefore, the prima facie

    opinion of the Government that the offending publication





    would come within the relevant section of the penal code

    with its requirements of intent would be adequate to





    enable it to act under
Section 95(1)
.           We respectfully

    agree with the view of the Patna High Court which is

    endorsed by the Supreme Court in Baragur that the onus

    to dislodge and rebut the prima facie opinion of the
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:27 :::
AJN
76
Government that the offending publication comes within




                                                                      
    the ambit of the relevant section is on the applicant. This




                                              
    submission of the applicant must, therefore, fail.
46. The submission that the power to ban a book is

    exercisable only when a clear and present danger exists




                                     
    and not on mere apprehension of danger, must also be
                       
    rejected. In this connection, Counsel laid emphasis on the

    observations of the Supreme Court in Lalai Singh that
                      
    the relevant section of the Code compels the Government

    to look into the matter "which calls for action to consider
        


    it as to the clear and present danger it constitutes in the
     



    shape of promoting feeling of enmity and hatred between

    different groups of citizens......." Counsel submitted that





    the State Government has not examined the case from

    the clear and present danger angle. On this aspect, it is





    necessary to refer to
Babulal Parate v. The State of

    Maharashtra & Ors.
AIR 1961 SC 884, where the

    Supreme    Court   was   dealing   with   challenge           to     the

    constitutional validity of
Section 144
of the Code. It was
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:28 :::
AJN
77
argued that
Section 144
adopts 'likelihood' or 'tendency'




                                                                        
    as tests for judging criminality; the test of determining the




                                                
    criminality in advance is unreasonable.
The Supreme

    Court observed that the doctrine of clear and present




                                               
    danger enumerated       in Schenk      v.       United States

    (1919) 249 US 47 cannot be imported under our




                                     
    Constitution because the fundamental rights guaranteed
                       
    under
Article 19(1)
of the Constitution are not absolute

    rights. Similar view was taken by the Supreme Court in
                      
    S. Rangarajan      v.   P. Jagjivan Ram, (1989) 2 SCC
574. The Supreme Court held that the First Amendment
        


    of the U.S. Constitution provides for absolute right of
     



    freedom of speech and of press. It contains no exception

    for exercise of the right. Therefore, the decisions bearing





    on the First Amendment are not useful to us except the

    broad principles and the purpose of the guarantee.
Counsel pointed out that in Ajay Goswami, the Supreme

    Court has referred to its judgment in S. Rangrajan and

    observed that in that      case while interpreting
Article

    19(2)
, it had borrowed from the American test of clear and
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:28 :::
AJN
78
present danger and, therefore, that test is still applicable.
We do not see any conflict in this. While clarifying that the




                                                  
    decisions bearing on the First Amendment are not useful

    to us except the broad principles and the purpose of the




                                                 
    guarantee, while considering whether "U" certificate of a

    feature film on reservation policy was rightly revoked, the




                                       
    Supreme Court observed that the anticipated danger
                        
    should not be remote, conjectural and far-fetched, it

    should    have   proximate     and   direct     nexus         with       the
                       
    expression of thought and the expression of thought

    should be intrinsically dangerous to the public interest. In
        


    our opinion, therefore the doctrine of clear and present
     



    danger has been modulated by the Supreme Court to be

    in tune with
Article 19(1)
and
(2)
to mean that ban can be





    imposed on apprehended danger but it has not to be

    remote,    conjectural    or   far-fetched      and        should         be





    intrinsically dangerous to the public interest.
47. We shall now turn to the gravamen of Counsel's

    argument     that   the   applicant    is     deprived            of      his
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:28 :::
AJN
79
fundamental right of freedom of speech and expression




                                                                     
    guaranteed to him under the Constitution.
48. Freedom of speech and expression is a cherished




                                            
    right of every citizen. Every person has a right to express

    what he/she feels about any issue which according to




                                      
    him/her needs to be debated upon or brought before the

    public eye.
Freedom of expression would also include

    freedom to criticize.      Indian democracy has survived
                        
    because of the protection its Constitution has granted to

    its people to express freely their views on affairs of the
        


    State and on other issues concerning religion, culture,
     



    civilization, literature and personalities, which are beyond

    the mundane affairs of the State.        This list is merely





    illustrative and not exhaustive.       Fearlessness is the

    hallmark of a vibrant, democratic and secular society like





    ours.   We are an amazing mix of people coming from

    different   social   and    cultural   background,            people

    professing different religions and people who speak

    different languages.    While we have a right to criticize
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:28 :::
AJN
80
each other, the criticism has to be healthy and not




                                                                    
    malicious. It must not lead to creating ill-will and hatred




                                            
    between different communities.      Freedom of expression

    must be well utilized, it must lead to sensible dialogue but




                                           
    not senseless destruction of lives and property and breach

    of public order.     The Constitution, therefore, while




                                    
    granting freedom of speech and expression under
Article
                       
    19(1)(a)
places reasonable restriction thereon.               Under
Article 19(2)
, while protecting a citizen's fundamental
                      
    right of freedom of speech and expression, the courts

    have always tried to strike a balance between this right
        


    and measure of restriction to be placed on it to prevent
     



    hurting religious and other sensibilities of people. It is a

    delicate and difficult task. We have only to revisit certain





    paragraphs of the judgments cited before us to ascertain

    how the balance has to be struck.
49. In Lalai Singh, the Supreme Court while stressing

    the importance of freedom of speech and expression

    observed that our Constitution makers respected Mill's
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:28 :::
AJN
81
famous statement from his essay "On Liberty" as under:
"If all mankind minus one were of one
               opinion and only one person were of the
               contrary opinion, mankind would be no
               more justified in silencing that one




                                              
               person than he, if he had the power
               would be justified in silencing mankind".
The Supreme Court then quoted Voltair's inspired
                         
    assertion :
"I disapprove of what you say, but I will
               defend to the death your right to say
        


               it".
(Attributed to Voltair in S.G. Tallentyre.
               The Friends of Voltair 1907).
50. Having quoted the above passages, the Supreme

    Court turned to passages from Gitlow              v.      New Yor





    (1924) 69 Law ed 1138, which were quoted by Dr.

    Ambedkar      in   the   Constituent   Assembly.           We       may

    reproduce them:
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:28 :::
AJN
82
"It is a fundamental principle long




                                                                    
             established, that the freedom of speech
             and of the press, which is secured by
             the Constitution does not confer an




                                            
             absolute right to speak or publish,
             without responsibility, whatever one
             may choose or an unrestricted and
             unbridled licence that gives immunity




                                           
             for every possible use of language and
             prevents the punishment of those who
             abuse this freedom".
"That a State in the exercise of its police
             power may punish those who abuse this
                      
             freedom by utterances inimical to the
             public welfare, finding to correct public
             morals, invite to crime or disturb the
                     
             public   peace,     is  not    open      to
             question ...."
51. The Supreme Court's further observations which are
     



    material need to be quoted.
The State, in India is secular and does
             not take sides with one religion or other
             prevalent in our pluralistic society. It has
             no direct concern with the faiths of the





             people but is deeply obligated not
             merely to preserve and protect society
             against breaches of the peace and
             violations of public order but also to
             create conditions where the sentiments
             and feelings of people of diverse and
             opposing beliefs and bigotries are not so
             molested by ribald writings or offensive
             publications as to provoke or outrage
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:28 :::
AJN
83
groups into possible violent action.
Essentially        good        government
              necessitates peace and security and
              whoever violates by bombs or books




                                            
              social tranquility will become target of
              legal interdict by the State."
52. The Supreme Court acknowledged that a drastic

    restriction on the right of a citizen when imposed by




                                     
    statute calls for a strict construction, especially when

    quasi-penal
                        
                  consequences    also   ensue.        As      regards

    balance to be struck between the right to freedom of
                       
    speech and expression and the reasonable restriction to

    be placed on it, the Supreme Court observed that "the
        


    balance is struck by governmental wisdom overseen by
     



    judicial review."
53. In Baragur, the Supreme Court observed that

    freedom of speech and expression is not unfettered and
Section 95
of the Code exemplies this principle on the

    understanding that this freedom must be available to all

    and no one has a right to impinge on the feelings of

    others on the premise that his right to freedom of speech
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:28 :::
AJN
84
remains unrestricted and unfettered. The Supreme Court




                                                                      
    observed that it cannot be ignored that India is a country




                                             
    with vast disparities in language, culture and religion and

    unwarranted and malicious criticism or interference in the




                                            
    faith of others cannot be accepted.     The Supreme Court

    quoted extensively from its judgment in Lalai Singh,




                                     
    reaffirmed the view taken therein and observed that
Section 95
of the Code is not violative of
Article 19(1)(a)
of

    the Constitution as the action taken thereunder is of a
                         
    preventive nature and
Section 96
provides an efficacious

    remedy for the aggrieved party.        The Supreme Court
        


    observed that most of the matters pertain to attacks on
     



    minorities or religious or social groups or individuals who

    are perceived as being prodigals or heretics and therefore





    unacceptable     to   the   conservatives        amongst             the

    mainstream. The Supreme Court further observed that it





    cannot ever be overemphasized that India is a country

    with huge diversities in language and religion and the

    weaker amongst them must be shown extra care and

    consideration.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:28 :::
AJN
85
54. In our constitutional set up, everything is open to




                                             
    criticism and religion is no exception to it. Every religion,

    whether it is Islam, Hinduism, Christianity or any other




                                            
    religion, can be criticized.      Freedom of speech and

    expression covers criticism of a religion and no person can




                                     
    be sensitive about it. Healthy criticism provokes thought,
                       
    encourages debate and helps us to evolve.                   Counsel

    submitted that the author has through the book placed his
                      
    perception of Islam before people. He submitted that the

    book brings the lesser known aspects of Islam before the
        


    public eye.   He submitted that the book gives correct
     



    insight into Islam, but assuming the author is wrong, he

    has a right to be wrong.
55. We do not want to join issue with Counsel on this





    aspect. The author has undoubtedly a right to be wrong.
The author can say what he feels is right and if it is wrong,

    he cannot be punished for it. But what needs to be seen

    is whether the author has done this exercise bona fide
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:28 :::
AJN
86
with a real desire to explore the tenets of Islam and give




                                                                      
    his exposition thereof.
56. An author has a right to put forth a perspective that




                                            
    a particular religion is not secular. This is a view point

    which one has a right to assert. However, if a book reeks




                                     
    of hatred for a particular community, if it contains rabid
                       
    material and there appears to be no sincere handling of

    the subject but a malafide exercise to stir communal
                      
    passions one must pause and consider whether it is in the

    interest of general public to allow its circulation. In such a
        


    situation restriction imposed on the freedom of speech
     



    and expression by the Constitution must spring into

    action.   It is necessary once again to remind ourselves





    that in Baragur, the Supreme Court has made it clear

    that no one has a right to impinge on the feelings of





    others on the premise that his right to freedom of speech

    remains unrestricted and unfettered and that it cannot be

    ignored that India is a country with vast disparities in

    language, culture and religion and unwarranted and
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:28 :::
AJN
87
malicious criticism or interference in the faith of others




                                                                      
    cannot be accepted.
57. Counsel submitted that so many books containing




                                             
    vituperative   articles   against   different     religions          are

    available in the market and in the age of the internet




                                      
    everything is available at the click of a mouse and
                       
    therefore, there is no point in banning books.                     This

    argument is totally unacceptable.      The courts deal with
                      
    books or films which are brought before it through

    accepted legal procedure.      That such material is freely
        


    available in the market is no argument against the ban. It
     



    is for the State, if it so desires, to take steps to stop

    circulation of such books or material. If the courts adopt





    such an approach the relevant provisions of the Code and

    the
IPC
would be rendered redundant. Ajay Goswami is





    not applicable to the present case because in that case

    the Supreme Court was dealing with obscene material

    printed   in   newspapers    against   the      background             of

    contemporary mores and national standards.                     It was
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:28 :::
AJN
88
dealing with contemporary standards as test. It was not




                                                                    
    dealing with a book containing an attack on a religion. In




                                            
    any case, the Supreme Court did not completely discard

    the test.    The Supreme Court observed that due to




                                           
    internet facilities, it has become somewhat outdated. We

    must, therefore, proceed to examine whether the ban is




                                    
    justified or not.
58. From the relevant judgments of the Supreme Court,
                       
    of this court and other High Courts we have deduced

    principles which will guide us while dealing with this case.
We are aware that it is not our duty to find out whether
     



    the book contains any matter which calls for its forfeiture.
We must concentrate on the grounds on which the





    Government formed its opinion and if the grounds justify

    that opinion the forfeiture must be upheld.          We cannot





    make a roving enquiry beyond the grounds set forth in the

    Notification. We shall therefore reproduce the contents of

    the book which have persuaded the Government to ban it.
Those are the grounds. We must see whether the opinion
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:28 :::
AJN
89
of the Government that the book must be forfeited is




                                                                           
    justified on the basis thereof.
59. Certain pages are cited in the Notification which are




                                                  
    stated to contain derogatory and false statements about

    Jihad, Quaran, Mohammad Paigamber, Indian Muslims and




                                        
    Conversions.      The Notification further states that the
                         
    author has made several derogatory and false statements

    about    Islam,     the   Muslim     community,            Mohammad
                        
    Paigambar and Muslim priests as specified in the Schedule

    appended      thereto.    The   attack    is      broadly          against
        


    Mohammad Paigambar, Quaran, Muslim religion and
     



    Muslim community with particular reference to Indian

    Muslims. We must give the gist of what is stated against





    each    of   them   which   has      weighed      with       the      State

    Government while imposing the ban.
The contents of the book found by the State to be

    objectionable.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:28 :::
AJN
90
60. Mohammad Paigambar.
a)    Mohammad grew up in his early childhood under




                                               
          queer   circumstances     as    he    was       born        as      a

          posthumous child.       Ayesha his wife has recorded




                                       
          some    facts   known    to    her   about       Mohammad.
According to her, Mohammad was greatly fond of

          women and perfumes. He is said to have made one
                         
          of his followers divorce his wife so that he could

          marry her since he said, he had an ilham from the
        


          God Almighty that she was born on the earth for him
     



          only. In course of 10 years of Mohammad's life from

          the age of 52 to 62 Mohammad, as a widower, after





          the death of his wife Khadija is said to have taken 11

          more wives.     At the age of about 52, he married a





          Jewish widow who was converted to Islam.                      After

          moving to Medina, he directed his friend and

          comrade Abu Bakr to marry his seven year old

          daughter Ayesha to him when he himself was about
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:28 :::
AJN
91
52 years of age. It is said that Abu Bakr declined to




                                                                    
          do so saying that his daughter by the name of




                                            
          Ayesha was too young and was also engaged to

          some one else.   This being a promise could not be




                                           
          broken.   In relationship Ayesha was the niece of

          Mohammad who put aside the objection of Abu Bakr




                                     
          saying that he had an ilham from Allah that he had
                       
          given birth to Ayesha to become his wife. The sixth

          wife of Mohammad was said to be the mother of four
                      
          children and was a Hindu who was converted for this

          purpose to accept Islam.     The seventh wife was
        


          Zarnab. She was Zainab wife of a slave by name Jaid
     



          whom Mohammad took as his adopted son and made

          him divorce his wife so that she could marry





          Mohammad. She is said to have been a very

          beautiful woman who took the fancy of Mohammad





          who had seen her naked when she was once bathing.
Here too, Mohammad is said to have stated that he

          had another ilham from Allah that he should marry

          her and that she was given birth on the earth for this
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:28 :::
AJN
92
purpose. Many writers have stated that besides the




                                                                       
          above, Mohammad also had more than 11 wives both




                                               
          religiously married and otherwise.
b)    It is said that Mohammad used to have strange

          attacks of some disease for which he used to retire




                                     
          to a cave near Mecca.    He announced to the world
                        
          that in the cave he used to meet God's messenger

          Gabriel who gave Mohammad God's own messages
                       
          which he called as Ilhams.
c)    He is said to have recorded himself issuing a Fatwa
     



          calling upon his followers not to resort to murders for

          forcing anyone to convert from his faith to faith





          professed by Mohammad. As can also be seen this

          Ayat (included in the holy book of Quaran) is the only





          single Ayat that is quoted by the Muslims as their

          faith in peace and tolerance of other religions. This

          was forced on account of important political reasons

          because there is no other Ayat in any Sura of Quaran
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:28 :::
AJN
93
ever said later in time repeating the spirit of this




                                                                     
          Ayat.
61. According    to us, the lurid details          allegedly          of




                                            
    Mohammad Paigambar's life, the authenticity of which

    may be challenged by some, could have been avoided by




                                      
    the author.   Source material for this is a book by name
                       
    "Rangeela Rasool' written by Pandit Chamupati. Extracts

    from the book "Islam & Terrorism" and the book "Sex and
                      
    Violence" written by Answar Shaikh are also relied upon. It

    is difficult for us to hold that the alleged details of the
        


    personal life of Mohammad Paigambar are based on any
     



    folklore or history.   It is not possible for us to conclude

    that they are in the nature of historical research. We feel





    that the attempt is to show Mohammad Paigambar in poor

    light to hurt Muslim sentiments.     In any case, it is well





    settled that if the writing is calculated to promote feelings

    of enmity or hatred it is no defence to a charge under
Section 153-A
of the IPC that the writing contains a

    truthful account of past events or is otherwise supported
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:28 :::
AJN
94
by good authority. Adherence to strict path of history is




                                                                        
    not by itself a complete defence to a charge under
Section




                                                
    153-A
of the IPC.     The Author has referred to an Ayat

    which calls upon the followers of Mohammad Paigambar




                                               
    not to resort to murders for forcing anyone to convert to

    his faith. This Ayat according to the author was forced on




                                         
    account of important political reasons because there is no
                         
    other Ayat in any Sura or Quaran ever said later in point

    of time repeating the spirit of this Ayat. Thus, Mohammad
                        
    Paigambar is designedly painted as a debauched person

    and   anything     which   can    be said   in his         favour         is
        


    discounted.   The details of the alleged personal life of
     



    Mohammad Paigambar will have to be read along with

    other material to get its true import.
62. Quaran and Muslim religion.
a)    The Muslims are ordained by their holy religious text

          to eliminate Kafr and the Kafirs from the surface of

          the earth.    Any bloody war that is fought by the
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:28 :::
AJN
95
believers against     the non-believers carries the




                                                                      
          religious sanction of Islam. Those who do not believe




                                              
          as above are the non-believers.        They are Kafirs.
What is not in accordance with Koran and Hadith is




                                             
          called Kafr. A Muslim is further ordained to wage a

          Jehad against non-believers even at the cost of his




                                      
          life. Should he die in this pursuit, the God assumed
                        
          Almighty as per Quaranic statements assures to such

          pursuer of faith, an assured life of joy and pleasure in
                       
          the heavens where he is promised to be served by

          72 beautiful maidens and 72 young male children to
        


          beget pleasures. Such a person is called a Shaheed.
Should he survive while pursuing this aim and live on

          the earth, Quaran promises on behalf of the God





          almighty Allah to enjoy the life on earth by using all

          that he gets by way of victory over the Kafirs.
b)    States    not managed and controlled by Islamic

          believers are called Darul-Herb.        States that are

          under the political control of the Islamic believers are
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:28 :::
AJN
96
called Darul-Islam. Islam declares to its followers




                                                                      
          where political governance is in the hands of the




                                              
          believer, they are to act and crush any counter idea

          and where it still lacks political control then to lie in




                                             
          wait for the moment when through all other means

          Darul-Herb gets converted into Darul-Islam.              This is




                                      
          one religion that supports it's spread by waging
                        
          Jehads including justifying conducts of terrorism

          when it says "show no mercy to the non-believers
                       
          (Kafirs) or the idol worshipers and lie in wait for them

          to behead them when they appear before you."
c)    Islam sanctions to its followers four wives instead of

          one. Islam considers weaker sex of woman as a





          commodity meant for the use and pleasure of men

          owing allegiance to Islam. A chapter in Quaran deals





          with social system and practices.           What is said

          therein is by the sanction of Allah told by him

          through Prophet Mohammad. He is the last and final

          messenger sent to the world by Allah and after him,
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:28 :::
AJN
97
none shall ever follow for any purpose whatsoever.
This is called as `Khatme Nawabac'.            None must




                                             
          think or amend, add or delete anything contained in

          the holy Quaran which is the last and final message




                                            
          of Allah that must bind all.         Islam advocates

          unabashedly Muslims' belief in violence to spread




                                     
          itself over the whole world. The important reason of
                          
          Islam's spread in India is its belief in rejecting

          humanness and accepting and enforcing cruelty in
                         
          its place.   Unlike human values of sacrifice and

          truthfulness followed in Hinduism, Islam sacrifices
        


          and disregards all such human values and proceeds
     



          to enforce at all costs, the message of Islam as set

          out in Koran.
d)    The recent attack on the Parliament of India is a





          clear reassertion of Islam's unaltered attitudes. India

          cannot afford to ignore or neglect to take note of this

          attitude of Islam that threatens Hindu way of life in

          India.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:28 :::
AJN
98
e)    Islam does not accord equality to any other system,




                                            
          political, religious, social or cultural and directs

          world's social and economic system to follow the




                                           
          original plan as was announced by Mohammad and is

          recorded in the Quaran and the Hadiths.
f)
                        
          No non-Muslim is equal to a Muslim and all Muslims

          are ordained never to trust any non-Muslim or to
                       
          even befriend them.     The non-Muslims must be

          subjected to special taxes and are ordained to be
           


          treated with cruelty as a matter of rule.         They are
        



          treated as Zimmis by which word is implied the

          hated non-believer.
g)    It is pertinent to record that Quaran directs the





          believers to die and/or to cause death in the name of

          Islam. Hence, continuing communal clashes in India

          is no surprise.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:28 :::
AJN
99
63. All these conclusions are mostly drawn from certain




                                                                         
    Ayats of Surahs.     The Author has described them as




                                                 
    provocative Ayats. To ascertain their meanings, we have

    taken assistance from Abdullah Yusuf Ali's book "The Holy




                                                
    Quran",   New Revised Edition and "The Message of the

    Quran" by Muhammad Asad to which our attention is




                                      
    drawn by Mr. Muchhala. Both the authors are known for
                       
    their deep study of the Quaran. It is necessary to

    reproduce the Surahs referred to by the applicant.
a)    Surah 2 Ayat 191.
        


                       "And slay them
     



                       wherever ye catch them,
                       And turn them out





                       From where they have 
                       Turned you out 
                       For tumult and oppression 





                       Are worse than slaughter;
                       But fight them not 
                       At the Sacred Mosque,
                       Unless they (first)
                       Fight you there;
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
100
But if they fight you,




                                                                         
                        Slay them




                                                 
                        Such is the reward 
                        Of those who suppress faith."
According to the author, this Ayat sanctions murders

    of non-believers.
Abdullah Yusuf Ali explains that this passage is
                       
    illustrated by the events that happened at Hydaybiyyah

    when the Pagans had established an intolerant autocracy
        

    in Mecca, Muslims were prevented from visiting their
     



    homes. They were not allowed to perform pilgrimage. At

    Hydaybiyyah a peaceful agreement was arrived at which





    the Muslims followed.      The Pagans committed breach of

    the agreement.        The spirit of the Ayat has to be

    understood    against     the    backdrop     of     above          facts.
According to Muhammad Asad, the injunction contained in

    the Ayat is only valid during hostilities.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
101
b)    Surah 2 Ayat 216.
"Fighting is prescribed
                       Upon you, and ye dislike it.
But, it is possible 
                       That ye dislike a thing
                       Which is good for you,



                                     
                       And that ye love a thing
                        
                       Which is bad for you 
                       But Allah Knoweth And ye Know not."
According to the author, this Ayat states that idol-
worship is worse than slaughter.
Abdullah Yusuf Ali explains this Ayat as under :
"To fight in the cause of Truth is one of the
          highest forms of charity. What can you offer that





          is more precious than your own life? But here
          again the limitations come in. If you are a mere
          brawler, or a selfish aggressive person, or a
          vainglorious bully, you deserve the highest
          censure. Allah knows the value of things better
          than you".
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
102
c)    Surah 3 Ayat 118.
"Ye who believe!




                                                
                       Take not into your intimacy
                       Those outside your ranks;
They will not fail




                                               
                       To corrupt you - They 
                       only desire your ruin:
Rank hatred has already
                       
                       Appeared from their mouths
                       What their hearts conceal
                      
                       Is far worse
                       We have made plain
                       To you the signs
        


                       If ye have wisdom."
According to the author, this Ayat states that a

    Muslim may not ever befriend another from any other

    religion.
Muhammad Asad says that this Ayat refers to only

    those people whose enmity to Islam and it's followers has

    become      apparent   from    their    behaviour         and       their
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
103
utterances.       If all non-Muslims are to be included as




                                                                                  
    persons with whom believers are not to form friendship




                                                          
    that will conflict with Surah 60 Ayat 8 - 9. It would be

    advantageous to quote those Ayats.
"Surah 60 Ayat 8.
As for such (of the unbelievers) as do not fight 
          against   you   on   account   of   (your)   faith,   and   neither 
                            
          drive   you   forth   from   your   homelands,   God   does   not 
          forbid   you   to   show   them   kindness   and   to   behave 
        


          towards them with full equity : for verily, God loves 
     



          those who act equitably.
Surah 60 Ayat 9.
God   only   forbids   you   to   turn   in   friendship 
          towards   such   as   fight   against   you   because   of   (your) 





          faith, and drive you forth from your homelands, or aid 
          (others)   in   driving   you   forth   :   and   for   those   (from 
          among you) who turn towards them in friendship, it is 
          they, they who are truly wrongdoers!"
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
104
64. Abdullah Yusuf Ali states that Surah 4 deals with the




                                                                        
    social problems which the Muslim community had to face




                                                
    immediately after the battle of Uhud in which Muslims

    suffered a defeat at the hands of Makkans who had lost




                                               
    the battle against them at Badr.      It deals inter alia with

    recalcitrants in the community at Madinah i.e. the




                                   
    Hypocrites and their accomplices.
a)    Surah 4 Ayat 15.
"If any of your women
                      Are guilty of lewdness,
        


                      Take the evidence of four
     



                      (Reliable) witnesses from amongst you,
                      Against them; and if they testify,





                      Confine them to houses until
                      Death do claim them,
                      Or Allah ordain for them





                      Some (Other) way."
While the author suggests that this Ayat indicates

    the unequal and cruel treatment given to women by
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
105
Islam, Abdullah Yusuf Ali states that this Ayat refers to




                                                                          
    unnatural crime between women and to protect the




                                                  
    honour of women it requires stricter evidence for four

    instead of the usual two witnesses.
b)    Surah 4 Ayat 56.




                                    
                       "Those who reject
                       
                       Our signs, we shall soon
                      
                       Cast into the Fire;
                       As often as their skins
                       Are roasted through
        


                       We shall change them
     



                       For fresh skins,
                       That they may taste





                       The penalty : for Allah
                       Is Exalted in Power, Wise."
Muhammad Asad explains this Ayat as containing

    awesome allegory of suffering in the life to come meant to

    bring out long lasting nature of that suffering.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
106
c)    Surah 4 Ayat 101.
"When ye travel
                        Through the earth,




                                                 
                        There is no blame on you,
                        If ye shorten your prayers,
                        For fear the Unbelievers


                                     
                        May attack you :
For the Unbelievers are
                       
                        Unto you open enemies."
Abdullah    Yusuf   Ali states that       this Ayat gives
        


    permission   to    shorten   congregational         prayers          when
     



    people are on journey.
d)    Surah 4 Ayat 102.
"When thou (O Messenger)
                        Art with them, and standest
                        To lead them in prayer,
                        Let one party of them
                        Stand up (in prayer) with them,
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
107
Taking their arms with them;
When they finish




                                                 
                       Their prostrations, let them
                       Take their position in the rear,
                       And let the other party come up




                                                
                       Which hath not yet prayed -
And let them pray with thee 



                                     
                       Taking all precautions,
                       And bearing arms,
                       
                       The unbelievers wish,
                      
                       If you were negligent
                       Of your arms and baggage,
                       To assault you in a single rush,
        


                       But there is no blame on you
     



                       If ye put away your arms
                       Because of the inconvenience





                       Of rain or because ye are ill;
But take (every) precaution
                       For yourselves.  For the Unbelievers





                       Allah hath prepared
                       A humiliating punishment."
From the explanation offered by Abdullah Yusuf Ali, it

    appears that this Ayat guides the believers how to
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
108
conduct congregational prayers in danger in face of the




                                                                        
    enemy.
e)    Surah 4 Ayat 104.
"And slacken not
                       In following up the enemy :
If ye are suffering hardships,
                        
                       They are suffering similar
                       
                       Hardships; but ye have
                       Hope from Allah, while they
                       Have none.  And Allah
        


                       Is full of Knowledge and Wisdom."
Abdullah Yusuf Ali explains this Ayat as under:
"Religion should be a source of strength and





          not of weakness in all our affairs. If we have to
          struggle hard and suffer hardships those without
          faith have to do the same, with this difference,
          that the man of Faith is full of hope in Allah,
          whereas the man without faith has nothing to
          sustain him."
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
109
f)    Surah 4 Ayat 116.
"Allah forgiveth not 
                       (The sin of) joining other gods
                       With him; but He forgiveth




                                               
                       Whom He pleaseth other sins
                       Than this : one who joins



                                     
                       Other gods with Allah,
                        
                       Hath strayed far, far away
                       (From the Right)"
According to the author, this Surah states that Allah
           


    shall never pardon idol-worship.
Abdullah Yusuf Ali's note on this Ayat reads as :
"Blasphemy in the spiritual kingdom is like





          treason in the political kingdom."
g)    Surah 5 Ayat 54.

                       "Ye who believe !
                       If any from among you
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
110
Turn back from his Faith




                                                                        
                      Soon will Allah produce




                                                
                      A people whom He will love
                      As they will love Him -
                      Lowly with the Believers




                                               
                      Mighty against the Rejecters
                      Fighting in the way of Allah,



                                   
                      And never afraid
                      Of the reproaches
                       
                      Of such as find fault
                      
                      That is the Grace of Allah
                      Which He will bestow
                      On whom He pleaseth
        


                      And Allah encompasseth all
     



                      And He knoweth all things"
According to the author, this Ayat states that the

    believers have not to befriend the Jews and the Christians.
Abdullah Yusuf Ali states that Surah 5 deals by way

    of recapitulation, with the backsliding of the Jews and

    Christians from their pure religion, to which the coping

    stone was placed by Islam.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
111
Abdullah Yusuf Ali states that this Ayat contains a




                                             
    warning to the Muslim body that they should not repeat

    the history of Jews and become so self satisfied or




                                            
    arrogant as to depart from the spirit of Allah's teaching. If

    they do, the loss will be their own. Allah's bounty is not




                                   
    confined to one group or section of humanity.                 He can
                         
    always raise up people who will follow the true spirit of

    Islam. That spirit is defined in two ways first in general
                        
    terms; they will love Allah and Allah will love them, and

    secondly they will offer no mealy mouthed compromises;
they will always strive and fight for truth and right, they
     



    will know no fear.
65. In his introduction to Surah 8, Abdullah Yusuf Ali

    states that the date of this Surah is shortly after the battle





    of Badr. According to him, in this chapter, there are the

    lessons of the battle of Badr enforced in their larger

    aspects : (1) the question of war booty; (2) the true

    virtues necessary for fighting the good fight (3) victory
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
112
against odds, (4) clemency and consideration for one's




                                                                         
    own and for others in the hour of victory.
a)    Surah 8 Ayat 65.
"Prophet! Rouse the Believers



                                     
                       To the fight.  If there are 
                       Twenty amongst you, patient
                        
                       And persevering, they will
                       
                       Vanguish two hundred, if a hundred,
                       They will vanguish a thousand
                       Of the unbelievers for these
        


                       Are a people without understanding."
Abdullah Yusuf Ali explains this Ayat as under :
"In a fight, odds of ten-to-one against
          anyone are appalling. But they do not daunt the
          men of faith. Whether they personally win or die,





          their cause prevails. They are sure to win,
          because (1) they have divine aid and (2) even
          humanly speaking, those who take up arms
          against truth and righteousness are fools and
          their seeming power is but a broken reed.
          According to the author, this Ayat calls upon the
          believers to rise to the fight and states that they
          will vanguish a thousand of the unbelievers."
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
113
66. In     his   introduction to Surah 9, Abdullah Yusuf Ali




                                                 
    states :
"We pass on in this Surah to deal with the
          question what is to be done if the enemy breaks
          faith and is guilty of treaching? No nation can
          go on with a treaty if the other party violates it




                                      
          at will, but it is laid down that a period of four
          months should be allowed by way of notice after
                         
          denunciation of the treaty; that due protection
          should be accorded in the intervening period;
          that there should always be open the door to
                        
          repentance and reunion with the people of Allah;
          and that if all these fail, and war must be
          undertaken it must be pushed with utmost
          vigour."
a)    Surah 9 Ayat 5.
"But when the forbidden months





                         Are past, then fight and slay,
                         The Pagans wherever ye find themselves





                         And seize them, beleaguer themselves
                         And lie in wait for them
                         In every stratagem (of war)
                         But if they repent,
                         And establish regular prayers
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
114
And practice regular charity,




                                                                        
                        Then open the way for them




                                                
                        For Allah is Oft-Forgiving
                        Most Merciful"
Abdullah Yusuf Ali in his commentary explains this




                                     
    Ayat as follows :
"It is only when the four months of grace
                       
          are past, and the other party shows no sign of
          desisting from their treacherous designs by right
          conduct, that the state of war supervenes -
          between Faith & Unfaith.
When war becomes inevitable it must be
          prosecuted with vigour...... The fighting may take
          the form of slaughter or capture or siege or
          ambush and other stratagems. But, even then





          there is room for repentance and amendment on
          the part of the guilty party, and if that takes
          place, our duty is forgiveness and the
          establishment of peace."
b)    Surah 9 Ayat 23.
"Ye who believe! Take not 
                        For protectors your fathers
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
115
And your brothers if they




                                                                            
                       love infidelity above faith,




                                                    
                       If any of you do so,
                       They do wrong."
Muhammad Asad states that this Ayat contains no




                                     
    exhortations to be bad to parents and kinsfolk because
                       
    there are many exhortations in the Quaran to be good to

    them and the believers are reminded that friendly
                      
    relations with unbelievers who are not hostile to the

    Muslim community are permissible and even desirable.
Muhammad        Asad     has   given      references           of      those
     



    exhortations.
c)    Surah 9 Ayat 28.
"Ye who believe! Truly





                       The Pagans are unclean,
                       So let them not,
                       After this year of theirs,
                       Approach the Sacred Mosque
                       And if ye fear poverty,
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
116
Soon will Allah enrich you,




                                                                        
                       If He wills, out of this bounty,




                                               
                       For Allah is All-knowing, All wise."
Abdullah Yusuf Ali explains this as under :
"Unclean :      Both       literally      and
          metaphorically, because Muslims are enjoined to
                        
          be strict in ablutions and physical cleanliness, as
          well as purity in mind and heart, so that their
          word can be relied upon.
The year of theirs : There       is      two         fold
          meaning -
(1) Now that you have complete control of
     



          Mecca, and are charged with the purity of
          worship there, shut out all impurity from this
          year;
(2) you have seen how the Pagans have
          behaved this year; their year of power and
          misuse of that power may be called their year, it
          is over, and now You Muslims are responsible.
The concourse in Mecca added to the profits
          of trade and commerce "But fear not", we are
          told "that Pagans area waning power, bound to
          disappear, and you should strengthen your own
          community,    that   they   may     more   than
          counterbalance the apparent loss of custom, and
          Allah has other means of improving your
          economic position".    This actually happened.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
117
The Pagans were extinguished from Arabia and




                                                                       
          the concourse of Pilgrims from all parts of the
          world increased the numbers more than a
          hundred fold. Here is commonsense, wisdom




                                               
          and statesmanship, even if we look at from a
          purely human point of view.
d)    Surah 9 Ayat 68.
"Allah hath promised the Hypocrites
                      Men and Women, and the rejecters,


                                    
                      Of Faith, the fire of Hell
                       
                      Therein shall they dwell:
Sufficient is it for them:
For them is the curse of Allah
                      And an enduring punishment."
Abdullah Yusuf Ali states that "Curse" here as

    elsewhere, is deprivation of grace and mercy, brought





    about by the rejection of Allah by non-believers.
e)    Surah 9 Ayat 111.
"Allah hath purchased of the Believers
                      Their persons and their goods;
                      For theirs (in return)
                      Is the Garden (of Paradise)
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
118
They fight in His Cause




                                                                         
                       And slay and are slain;
A promise binding on Him
                       In Truth, through the hand,
                       The Gospel, and the Quran;
And who is more faithful
                       To his covenant than Allah?
Then rejoice in the bargain
                       Which ye have concluded;
That is the achievement supreme."
Abdullah Yusuf Ali explains this Ayat as under :
"In a human bargain both sides give
          something and receive some advantage. In the
          divine bargain of Allah with man, Allah takes
          man's will and soul and his wealth and goods





          and gives him in return everlasting felicity. Man
          fights in Allah's course and carries out His will.
          All that he has to give up is the ephemeral things
          of this world, while he gains eternal salvation,
          the fulfillment of his higher spiritual hopes - a





          supreme achievement included."
f)    Surah 9 Ayat 123.
"Ye who believe! Fight
                       The Unbelievers who gird you about,
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
119
And let them find firmness




                                                                           
                        In you : and know that Allah




                                                   
                        Is with those who fear Him."
Abdullah Yusuf Ali explains this as under :
"When conflicts become inevitable, the first
          thing is to clear our surroundings of all evil, for it
                        
          is only evil that we can rightly fight. To evil we
          must put a stout and stiff resistance. Mealy
          mouthed compromises are not right for soldiers
                       
          of truth and righteousness. They are often a
          compound of cowardice, weariness, greed and
          compatibility."
67. Surah 21 Ayat 98.
"Verily ye (Unbelievers)





                        And the (false) goods that
                        Ye worship besides Allah,
                        Are (but) fuel for Hell!





                        To it will ye (surely) come!"
According to the author, this Surah states that `you

    and your idols deserve condemnation'.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
120
In the introduction to this Surah, Abdullah Yusuf Ali




                                                                       
    has stated that this Surah deals with the individual story




                                               
    (spiritual) of Moses and Aaron.      This Surah gives the

    assurance of Allah's power to defend men, illustrating it




                                              
    with reference to Abraham's fight against idolatry.
68. According to the author, Surah 16 Ayat 46 states that
                       
    idol worship is a great sin.      We do not find any such

    exhortation in that Ayat. Author is also not right when he
                      
    says that Ayat 22 of Surah 18 ordains a new convert to

    abandon connections with his kith and kin including father
        


    and brother unless they too follow the new convert into
     



    Islamic faith. This Ayat does not say so.
69. Surah 21 Ayat 67.
"Fie upon you, and upon





                      The things that ye worship 
                      Besides Allah! Have ye
                      No sense?"
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
121
According to the author, this Ayat states that you




                                                                       
    and your idols deserve condemnation. In the introduction




                                               
    to this Surah, Abdullah Yusuf Ali has stated that this Surah

    deals with the individual story (spiritual) of Moses and




                                              
    Aaron. Thus Surah gives the assurance of Allah's power

    to defend men, illustrating it with reference to Abraham's




                                    
    fight against idolatry.
70. Surah 32 Ayat 22.
"And who does more wrong
                       Than one to whom are recited
        


                       The signs of his Lord
     



                       And who then turns away
                       Therefrom? Verily from those





                       who transgress we shall exact
                       (Due) Retribution."
Abdullah Yusuf Ali explains this as :
"The worst and most hardened sinner is the
          man to whom Allah's signs are actually brought
          home and who yet prefers Evil and turns away
          from the light of Allah. The signs may be in the
          words and guidance of a great Teacher or in
          some minor sorrow or warning which he
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
122
disregards with contumely - Or it may be a




                                                                         
          catastrophic blow to his conscience, which
          should open his eyes, but from which he
          deliberately refuses to profit. The penalty - the




                                                 
          Nemesis - must necessarily come eventually."
71. Surah 48 Ayat 20.
"Allah has promised you



                                    
                       Many gains that ye shall
                       Acquire, and He has given
                        
                       You these beforehand, and
                       
                       He has restrained the hands
                       Of men from you, that it
                       May be a sign for
        


                       The Believers, and that
     



                       He may guide you
                       To a straight path,"
Abdullah Yusuf Ali explains :
"The gains so far seen from the Bayah (the
          Fealty of Allahs good pleasure) and their calm
          and disciplined behaviour were certainly great;
          but greater still were to follow in the spiritual
          sense, in the rapid spread of Islam, in the
          clearance from the sacred House of the
          idolatrous autocracy, and in the universal
          acceptance of the Message of Allah in Arabia.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
123
Abdullah Yusuf Ali states that this Surah pertains




                                                                       
          to the period when the Pagans tried to prevent
          peaceful party led by the Prophet from
          performing the rites of pilgrimage in Mecca.
There was a treaty between the two sides which
          was broken by the Pagans. Ultimately Mecca
          was conquered and Pagan autocracy was swept
          away."
72. Surah 60 Ayat 4.
"There is for you
                       
                      An excellent example (to follow)
                      
                      In Abraham and those with him,
                      When they said
                      To their people
        


                      "We are clear of you
     



                      And of whatever ye worship
                      Besides Allah: We have rejected





                      You, and there has arisen
                      Between us and you, enmity
                      And hatred forever - unless





                      Ye believe in Allah
                      And Him alone
                      But not when Abraham
                      Said to his father;
"I will pray for forgiveness
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
124
For thee, though I have




                                                                         
                       No power (to get) aught




                                                 
                       On thy behalf from Allah
                       (They prayed) : Our Lord!
                       In Thee do we trust,




                                                
                       And to Thee do we turn
                       In repentance : to Thee



                                     
                       Is (our) final Goal."
According to the author, in this Ayat Islam openly

    builds feelings of hatred towards the Christians.                    As a

    matter of fact there is no reference to Christians in this
        
     



    Ayat.   According to Abdullah Yusuf Ali, the date of this

    Surah is after the Pagans had broken the treaty of





    Hudaybiyah. This Ayat refers to Abrahams resistance to

    his father and his people and their belief in idolatry.
73. Author states that Jehad is a Muslims foremost

    religious duty.   Item 3 in the Schedule describes the

    pleasures a believer gets as per Quaran should he die in

    this pursuit. Such a person is called a Shaheed and in the
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
125
heaven he is promised to be served by 72 beautiful




                                                                   
    maidens and 72 young male children to beget pleasure.
Should he survive, Quaran promises such person on

    behalf of Allah to enjoy life on earth by using all that he




                                          
    gets by way of victory over Kafirs.
74. On behalf of intervenors it is pointed out that such
                       
    descriptions refer to spiritual bliss and contentment

    Quaran promises to all good conscious people who have
                      
    accepted the Divine Message, the spiritual elevation of

    soul to the state of bliss.    Certain Ayats are cited in
        


    support of this.
75. We must refer to certain other Ayats to which our





    attention is drawn by Mr. Muchhala, counsel for the

    intervenor. We have reproduced them from Muhammad





    Asad's book "The Message of the Quran". We have also

    reproduced the gist of the commentary of Muhammad

    Asad.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:29 :::
AJN
126
"a)   Surah 5 Ayat 32.
Because of this did we ordain unto the children  




                                                        
          of Israel that if anyone slays a human being - unless it  
          be   (in   punishment)   for   murder   or   for   spreading  
          corruption of earth - it shall be as through he had slain  




                                                       
          all mankind; whereas, if anyone saves a life, it shall be  
          as through he had saved the lives of all mankind.  And,  



                                           
          indeed,   there   came   unto   them   our   apostles   with   all  
                            
          evidence of the truth; yet behold, notwithstanding all  
          this, many  of them go  on committing  all manner  of  
                           
          excesses on earth."
b)    Surah 7 Ayat 151.
Say : "Come, let me convey unto you what God  
          has (really) forbidden to you":
"Do not ascribe divinity, in any way, to aught  
          beside Him; and [do not offend against but, rather] do  





          good unto your parents; and do not kill your children  
          for fear of poverty - (for) it is We who shall provide  
          sustenance for you as well as for them; and do not  
          commit any shameful deeds, be they open or secret; and  
          do not take any human being's life (the life) which God
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:30 :::
AJN
127
has   declared   to   be   sacred   -   otherwise   than   in   [the  




                                                                                  
          pursuit of] justice; this has been enjoined upon you so  




                                                         
          that you might use your reason.
c)    Surah 42 Ayat 40.
But remember that an attempt at requitting evil  




                                                        
          may,   too   became   an   evil.     Hence,   whoever   pardons  
          [hisfoe] and makes peace, his reward rests with God-
for, verily, He does not love evildoers.
d)    Surah 42 Ayat 41.
Yet   indeed,   as   for   any   who   defend   themselves  
          after   having   been   wronged   -   no   blame   whatever  
           


          attaches to them.
e)    Surah 42 Ayat 42.
Blame attaches but to those who oppress (other)  
           people   and   behave   outrageously   on   earth,   offending  
           against all right: for them there is grievous suffering in  





           store.
f)    Surah 42 Ayat 43.
But   withal,   if   one   is   patient   in   adversity   and
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:30 :::
AJN
128
forgives - this, behold, is indeed something to set one's 




                                                                              
          heart upon!
g)    Surah 49 Ayat 13.
O men! Behold, we have created you all out of a  
          male and a female, and have made you into nations  



                                          
          and   tribes,   so   that   you   might   come   to   know   one  
          another.  Verily, the noblest of you in the sight of God  
                           
          is the one who is most deeply consciousness of Him.
Behold, God is all-knowing, all-aware."
This Ayat contains the idea of essential human
     



    oneness.
h)    Surah 13 Ayat 7.
However, they who are bent on denying the truth  





          [refuse to believe and] say "Why has no miraculous sign  
          ever been bestowed on him on high by his sustainer?  
          [But] thou art only a warner; and [in God] all people  
          have a guide.
According       to   the    classical     commentators,                the
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:30 :::
AJN
129
sentence   "[But] thou art only a warner; and [in God] all people 




                                                                                      
                                                              
    have a guide"   lends itself several interpretations and one of

    the interpretations is that Thou art only a warner bound to




                                                             
    do no more than deliver the message entrusted to thee,

    while it is God alone who can truly guide men's hearts




                                               
    towards faith.
i)    Surah 8 Verse 48.
And   unto   thee   ..................................................... 
          Unto every one of you we appointed a [different] law 
           


          and way of life.   And if God has so willed, He could 
        



          surely have made you all one single community : But 
          [He willed it otherwise] in order to test you by means of 





          what He has vouchsafed unto you, Vie then, with one 
          another in doing good works! Unto God you all must 
          return; and then He will make you truly understand all 





          that on which you were want to differ.
The Quaran impresses upon all who believe in God-
Muslims and non-Muslims alike - that the differences in
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:30 :::
AJN
130
their religious practices should make them "vie with one




                                                                               
    another in doing good works" rather than lose themselves




                                                       
    in mutual hostility.
j)    Surah 6 Ayat 188.
But do not revile those [beings] whom they invoke 



                                           
          instead of God, lest they revile God out of spite, and in 
          ignorance, for goodly indeed have we made their own 
                           
          doings   appear   unto   every   community.     In   time, 
                          
          [however]   unto  their  sustainer  they   must   return   and 
          then   He   will   make   them   [truly]   understand   all   that 
          they were doing.
While Muslims are expected to argue against false





    beliefs of others, they are not allowed to abuse the

    objects of those beliefs and to hurt thereby the feelings of

    their erring fellow-men.
k)    Surah 14 Ayat 4.
AND   NEVER   have   we   set   forth   any   apostle 
          otherwise  than  [with  a message]  in  his  own  people's
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:30 :::
AJN
131
tongue, so that he might make [the truth] clear unto 




                                                                                  
          them;   but   God   lets   go   astray   him   that   wills   [to   go 




                                                          
          astray] and guides him that wills [to be guided] - for 
          He   alone   is   almighty   truly   wise.   God   bestows   His 
          favour upon him who, as he knows, will choose faith;
which   means   that   He   makes   the   issue   dependent   on 
          [man's] free choice.
l)    Surah 11 Ayat 117.
For   never   would   thy   sustainer   destroy   a 
          community   for   wrong   [beliefs   alone]   so   long   as   its 
          people behave righteously [towards one another].
m)    Surah 11 Ayat 118.
And had thy sustainer so willed, He could surely 
          have made all mankind one single community: but [He 
          willed   it   otherwise,   and   so]   they   continue   to   hold 





          divergent views.
n)    Surah 2 Ayat 256.
THERE SHALL BE no coercion in matters of
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:30 :::
AJN
132
faith. Distinct has now become the right way from [the 




                                                                               
          way of] error: hence, he who rejects the powers of evil 




                                                       
          and believes in God has indeed taken hold of a support 
          most unfailing, which shall never give way : for God is 
          all hearing, all-knowing.
...... all Islamic jurists, without exception,hold that




                                          
    forcible conversion is under all circumstances null and
                           
    void, and that any attempt at coercing a non-believer to
                          
    accept the faith of Islam is a grievous sin : a verdict which

    disposes of the widespread fallacy that Islam plans before
        


    the unbelievers the alternative of "conversion by sword".
76. On polygamy and treatment to women, our attention





    is drawn to following Ayats.
a)    Surah 4 Ayat 3.
And if you have reason to fear that you might 
          not  act equitably towards orphans, then many from 
          among   [other]   women   such   as   are   lawful   to   you   - 
          [even] two, or three, or four : but if you have reason to
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:30 :::
AJN
133
fear that you might not be able to treat them with 




                                                                                   
          equal fairness, then [only] one - or [from among] those 




                                                           
          whom you rightfully possess.   This will make it more 
          likely that you will not deviate from the right course.
Islam gives permission to marry, two, three or four




                                             
    women, only on the condition that he deals justly with

    them.
b)    Surah 4 Ayat 129.
And it will not be within your power to treat your 
        


          wives   with   equal   fairness,   however   much   you   may 
     



          desire   it,   and   so,   do   not   allow   yourselves   to   incline 
          towards one to the exclusion of the other leaving her in 





          a   State,   as   it   were,   of   having   and   not   having   a 
          husband.     But   if   you   put   things   to   right   and   are 
          conscious   of   Him   -   behold,   God   is   indeed   much-
forgiving, a dispenser of grace.
These Ayats impose a moral restriction on plural

    marriages.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:30 :::
AJN
134
c)    Surah 33 Ayat 35.
Verily,   for   all   men   and   women   who   have 




                                                       
          surrendered themselves unto God, and all believing men 
          and   believing   women   and   all   truly   devout   men   and 
          truly devout women, and all men and women who are 




                                                      
          true to their word, and all men and women who are 
          patient   in   adversity,   and   all   men   and   women   who 



                                          
          humble   themselves   [before   God],   and   all   men   and 
                           
          women who give in charity, and all self-denying men 
          and self-denying women, and all men and women who 
                          
          are mindful of their chastity, and all men and women 
          who remember God unceasingly : for [all of] them has 
          God readied forgiveness of sins and a mighty reward.
This Ayat indicates that Quaran addresses both the





    genders and gives them spiritual benefits.
d)    Surah 9 Ayat 71.
And [as for] the believers, both men and women - 
          they are close unto one another : they [all] enjoin the 
          doing of what is right and forbid the doing of what is 
          wrong,   and   are   constant   in   prayer,   and   render   the 
          purifying   dues,   and   pay   heed   unto   God   and   His
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:30 :::
AJN
135
Apostle.   It is they upon whom God will bestow His 




                                                                            
          grace: verily, God is almighty, wise!  




                                                    
          Role of men and women towards each other is




                                                   
    complementary. They are protectors of each other.
e)    Surah 4 Ayat 19.
O. You who have attained to faith !   It is not 
          lawful for you to [try to] become heirs to your wives [by 
                          
          holding onto them] against their will; and neither shall 
          you keep them under constraint with a view to taking 
        


          away   anything   of   what   you   may   have   given   them, 
     



          unless it be that they have become guilty, in an obvious 
          manner, of immoral conduct.
And consort with your wives in a good manner; 
          for if you dislike them, it may well be that you dislike 





          something   which   God   might   yet   make   a   source   of 
          abudant good.
The Quaran does not regard woman as a commodity

    but as human being with her own individuality with bundle
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:30 :::
AJN
136
of spiritual social, economic and legal rights.
77. We have seen how the relevant Ayats have been

    interpreted by the author and by Abdullah Yusuf Ali and




                                              
    Muhammad Asad. As we have already stated the author

    has a right to express his views on a religion. But having




                                   
    examined different interpretations of the same Ayats, we
                       
    feel that the author's interpretation may not necessarily

    be the correct and final interpretation.
78. We do not want to embark upon the difficult task of
        


    interpreting the Quaran. But anyone who ventures to do
     



    so must read what Muhammad Asad has said in his

    forward to his book "The Message of the Al-Quran". He





    states -
"Firstly, the Quaran must not be viewed as
          a compilation of individual injunctions and
          exhortations but as one integral whole: that is,
          as an exposition of an ethical doctrine in which
          every verse and sentence has an intimate
          bearing on another.       Consequently, its real
          meaning can be grasped only if we correlate
          every one of its statements with what has been
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:31 :::
AJN
137
stated elsewhere in its pages, and try to explain




                                                                    
          its ideas by means of frequent cross references,
          always subordinating the particular to the
          general and the incidental to the intrinsic.
Whenever this rule is faithfully followed, we
          realize that the Quaran is - in the words of
          Muhammad Abduh - "its own best commentary".
Secondly, no part of the Quaran should be
          viewed from purely historical point of view: that
          is to say, all its reference to historical
          circumstance and events - both at the time of




                                  
          Prophet and in earlier times - must be regarded
          as illustrations of the historical occasion on
                       
          which a particular verses was revealed - a
          pursuit so dear, and legitimately so, to the
          hearts of the classical commentators - must
                      
          never be allowed to obscure the underling
          purport of that verse and its inner relevance to
          the ethical teaching which the Quaran, taken as
          a whole, propounds".
79. It appears to us therefore that after reading the

    Quaran as a whole, its Ayats will have to be correlated.
Some of the Ayats are indeed strongly worded and appear

    to have been directed against idol worshipers.              Having





    read the commentaries we feel that perhaps it is possible

    to urge that they relate to an era when the Muslims were

    attacked by the Pagans.    The reference to the battle of

    Badr, to the battle of Uhud, the breach of the treaty of
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:31 :::
AJN
138
Hudaybiyah, the incidents at Mecca and Medina indicate




                                                                       
    this. The call for war, the punishment to be imposed on




                                               
    non-believers, the violence can be perhaps related to

    those troubled times. We have reproduced several Ayats




                                              
    where importance of peace, tolerance, brotherhood, equal

    treatment to women aversion to forceful conversions is




                                  
    reflected. On the author's view that spread of Islam was
                       
    due to the fear of sword, we have been taken through

    extract from books of several authors, which state that
                      
    Islam's spread in Indonesia, Malaysia, East coast of Africa

    was peaceful.    It would be appropriate to name a few.
"Islam at the Crossroads" by De Lacy Oheary Ricklefs, "A
     



    History   of   Modern   Indonesia"   2nd   Edition        London          :
McMillan, Van Nieu Wenhuize C.A.O. (1958) Aspects of





    Islam in Post-Colonial Indonesia.
80. We must also note that the author has quoted the

    views of Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar, Mahatma Gandhi,

    Ramkrishna Paramhans, Swami Vivekananda and other

    thinkers which are compiled by Rana Pratap Roy which
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:31 :::
AJN
139
support him. We must also state that several other Ayats




                                                                        
    were referred to by Counsel which are also strongly




                                                
    worded against idolators. But then two views are always

    possible of every Ayat. The Supreme Court has cautioned




                                               
    us not to import our views while dealing with scriptures.
(
Shri Krishna Singh v. Mathura Ahir & Ors.
(1981)




                                     
    3 SCC 689).
The Calcutta High Court has taken a similar
                         
    view (Aga Mahomed Jaffer Bindanim                   v.      Koolsom

    Beebee & Ors. (1898) ILR XXV Cal.9). We, therefore,
                        
    do not want to import our own views. But, in the ultimate

    analysis, we feel that several view points are in the field
        


    about Islam as there are about other religions and we
     



    cannot stop people from expressing their views. As said

    by one of us Chandrachud, J. in Anant Dighe ".... it is





    important to realise that there are eternal values on which

    the Constitution of a democracy is founded. Tolerance of





    a diversity of view points and the acceptance of the

    freedom to express of those whose thinking may not

    accord with the mainstream are cardinal values which lie

    at    the   very   foundation    of   a   democratic         form        of
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:31 :::
AJN
140
Government".     The Supreme Court has also clarified that
Section 295-A
of the IPC does not penalize any and every




                                                
    act of insult or attempt to insult the religion or the

    religious beliefs of a class of citizens.     There must be a




                                               
    malicious intention to outrage the religious feelings of that

    class of citizens.   That is the reason Counsel submitted




                                   
    that assuming the book contains material which insults
                         
    religious beliefs of Muslims, it is not aggravated form of

    insult.
81. It is not possible for us to agree with Counsel.                   We
        


    have no doubt that the author must be allowed to criticize
     



    Islam. Pure and simple criticism without any intention to

    hurt religious feelings of a particular community must be





    allowed.   But, here the criticism is not academic.                   The

    author has gone on to pass insulting comments on





    Muslims with particular reference to Indian Muslims. That

    is most objectionable.      We shall now turn to those

    comments.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:31 :::
AJN
141
82. Muslim community with particular reference to Indian




                                                                    
    Muslims.
a)    Islam advocates unabashedly Muslim's belief in




                                           
          violence to spread itself over the whole world.
Nothing short of it has been the aim of any




                                     
          Musalman, a true believer of Islam.
b)    The Muslims believe and are ordained by their holy
                      
          religious texts to eliminate Kufr and the Kafirs from

          the surface of the earth.
c)    Muslims do not and cannot accept any non-believer

          as equal to them and hence Modi of Gujarat is too





          right when he cautions Indian people to unite to

          safeguard themselves from Muslim invasion who are





          waiting only to convert India from Darul-Herb to

          Darul-Islam and now openly say and believe in Ham

          Panch, Hamare Pacchis.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:31 :::
AJN
142
d)    Chapter XXIV - Indian Muslims call for Mughalstan




                                                                              
          from out of India.
e)    It is in the annals of history that the Muslims infact




                                                     
          considered even conspiring against the soil of India.
f)    The    Muslims      within       India     after       1947         have
                            
          recommended a plan of action for all Muslims in

          India to use following 10 methods for immediate
                           
          implementation.
1.    Convert Hindus by every means to embrace
        



                Islam.
2.    By polygamy God himself divinely allows

                you this.
3.    By       thwarting     any         family       planning

                programme.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:31 :::
AJN
143
4.   Infiltrate into India from all directions to




                                                                       
               grow fast as servants of Allah.
5.   Form Muslim majority geo-political areas




                                              
               within India.
6.   Force Mass expulsion of Hindus when they
                        
               come close to being a religious minority.
7.   Jehad is the duty of every Muslim.                   Be

               Allaha's own soldiers to fight and kill those
        


               who oppose his diction as said in Quaran.
8.   Let no non-believer dare settle where you





               have come into close majority.
9.   Abduct women of Hindus to breed out of

               them    your     children.    Hindu      abducted

               women      are   delivered   to you as           male

               Ganimat.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:31 :::
AJN
144
10. Attack the foundation of Hindu culture in




                                              
               India, their temples and their books. They

               will    then   automatically   follow         Allahs




                                             
               ordainment and convert to Islam.               Know

               this, that India is under attack of Islam.
g)
                         
          The real reason of creating India and Pakistan as two

          independent nations has its roots in the religious
                        
          belief of the Muslims who spoke through their

          leaders Mohammad Ali Jinnah that Hindus and
        


          Muslims of the Indian sub-continent were distinctly
     



          two different nations, politically, socially, culturally

          and religiously.
h)    Those who embraced Islam in India mostly did so





          under the threat of sword or were lured into it for its

          easy promise of heavens where beautiful women and

          young kinds were promised as rewards to the

          believers.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:31 :::
AJN
145
83. Whatever be the author's perception of Islam, to




                                             
    conclude that all Muslims want to eliminate all non-
Muslims; that they want to spread Islam all over the world




                                            
    by violence is highly objectionable. The author has gone a

    step further and said that Indian Muslims         have given a




                                   
    call for Mughalstan from out of India and that all Indian
                      
    Muslims believe that Hindus and Muslims are distinctly

    two different nations politically, socially, culturally and
                     
    religiously. The author has stated that the Indian Muslims

    have recommended a plan of action which inter alia
        


    includes converting every Hindu to Islam, attacking Hindu
     



    temples,   abducting   Hindu    women,    thwarting            family

    planning programme, etc.       It is these statements which





    are likely to incite people to violence and which may

    promote violence, enmity or hatred.          The author has





    referred to inflammatory statements of Osama Bin Laden.
He has made reference to speech made by Sayeed Abdul

    Bukhari in 1986 that Secularism has no place in Islam. He

    has made reference to speech made by General Zia-ul-
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:31 :::
AJN
146
Haq that Islam can never be secular. He has referred to




                                                                    
    extract from Dr. Ali Mohd. Naqvis book "Islam and




                                            
    Nationalism" to the effect that nationalism is incompatible

    with Islam.   He has made reference to similar extracts




                                           
    from books written by Sayeed Abdullah Naudoode and

    Sayeed Ahmed Hussain. He has quoted exract from the




                                  
    book "Islam in Secular India" by Dr. Mushir-ul-Haq where
                       
    he has said that leaving aside a small section of Indian

    Muslims, the majority is by no means secular and main
                      
    reason for their resistance of secularism appears to be

    their conception of Islam.        These may be views of
        


    individuals on which we do not want to comment. They
     



    are not the subject matter of this application. But, we feel

    that the author cannot comment on all Muslims, and the





    Indian Muslims in particular and paint them as villains.
The author has said that the Muslims in fact considered





    even conspiring against the soil of India, forgetting the

    role played by several Muslim leaders in the freedom

    struggle of India as followers of Mahatma Gandhi.                     It

    cannot be denied that misguided Muslim youth have
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:31 :::
AJN
147
indulged in acts of terrorism.      But misguided youth are




                                                                      
    there in other religions and there are instances where




                                              
    they have indulged in acts of violence. Because of such

    instances   the   entire   Muslim    community         cannot         be




                                             
    branded as terrorists. The author could not have painted

    the entire Muslim community with the same brush. The




                                    
    author has insulted a large section of Indian Muslims who
                        
    are part of the mainstream of the nation's life and who are

    contributing to India's development in all fields.
84. What is more disturbing is the author's wishful
        


    thinking that a war between Muslim and others is
     



    impending. He writes :
"To me, a war between the Islamic
          fundamentalists and those who do not accept it,
          is a must. Not only can one look back to the





          prediction of French philosopher Nosterdamis
          made in 15th century, one can also read Prof.
          Hattington's analysis with declaration of world
          itself polarizing into two camps in order to fight a
          decisive war once for all. A war between two
          civilizations."
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:31 :::
AJN
148
85. The author further writes :
"The worlds political and religious leaders
          must immediately look into the real cause of




                                             
          terrorism that clearly finds its roots in the Islamic
          philosophy contained in the holy Quaran. It is
          this question which is posed to the whole world
          that must unite to finally create a war out of it




                                    
          that must include if necessary, facing a war, that
          may be thrust by the believers upon non-
believers."
86. With such exhortations can we say that the book will

    not promote enmity between two religions or that it is not
        


    intended to outrage the religious feelings of Muslims or
     



    that it is not likely to create dis-harmony or feelings of

    enmity, hatred or ill-will between Hindus and Muslims?
87. It is argued that nothing has happened so far though





    the book was in circulation for a long time.              It is well

    settled that it is not necessary to prove that as a result of

    the objectionable matter enmity or hatred was in fact

    caused between different classes.      It is enough to show
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:31 :::
AJN
149
that the language of the writing is of a nature calculated




                                                                     
    to promote feelings of enmity or hatred. (Gopal Godse).
88. It is true that whether the objectionable matter is




                                            
    meant for limited circulation, whether it is to cater to an

    ignorant, illiterate inflammable mob or educated people




                                   
    would be a relevant consideration and the effect of the
                       
    words must be judged from the standards of reasonable

    strong minded firm and courageous men and not those
                      
    who scent danger in every hostile point of view.                  It is

    therefore, necessary to consider who will read the book.
89. The translation of the book is available.                      The

    possibility of its falling in the hands of an inflammable





    mob cannot be ruled out. The way this sensitive topic is

    handled by the author, it is likely to arouse the emotions





    or sensibilities of even strong minded people.            We have

    held that criticism of Islam is permissible like criticism of

    any other religion and the book cannot be banned on that

    ground. But we have also held that the criticism of Islam
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:31 :::
AJN
150
is not academic. The author has gone on to pass insulting




                                                                     
    comments on Islam, Muslim community with particular




                                             
    reference to Indian Muslims. It is an aggravated form of

    criticism made with a malicious and deliberate intention




                                            
    to outrage the religious feelings of Muslims. The contents

    are so interwoven that it is not possible to excise certain




                                  
    portions and permit circulation of the book. We may also
                      
    mention that at one point of time, when this was

    discussed, the author declined to excise the book.
90. In view of the above, in our considered opinion the
        


    State Government is justified in imposing a ban on the
     



    circulation of the book.    The application is therefore

    dismissed.
[SMT. RANJANA DESAI, J.]





                                  [DR. D.Y.CHANDRACHUD, J.]



                                         [R.S. MOHITE, J.]
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 15:29:31 :::