SOURCE: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/139642699/
SCRAPED: 2026-02-18T10:27:31.856804
TITLE: Full Document
================================================================================

[Cites
49
, Cited by
0
]
Karnataka High Court
Shri Sushil Pandurang Mantri vs The State Of Karnataka By on 9 October, 2023
Author:
M. Nagaprasanna
Bench:
M. Nagaprasanna
1



      IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU

        DATED THIS THE 09TH DAY OF OCTOBER, 2023

                         BEFORE

        THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M. NAGAPRASANNA

         WRIT PETITION No.10258 OF 2020 (GM-RES)
                           C/W
         WRIT PETITION No.7855 OF 2023 (GM-RES)


IN WRIT PETITION No.10258 OF 2020 (GM-RES)

BETWEEN:

1 . SHRI SUSHIL PANDURANG MANTRI
    S/O SHRI PANDURANG MANTRI
    AGED ABOUT 53 YEARS
    MANAGING DIRECTOR
    M/S. MANTRI DEVELOPERS PVT. LTD.,
    MANTRI HOUSE, VITTAL MALLYA ROAD
    BENGALURU CITY
    BENGALURU - 560 001.

2 . SHRI PRATIK SUSHIL MANTRI
    S/O SHRI SUSHIL MANTRI
    AGED ABOUT 35 YEARS
    MANAGING DIRECTOR
    M/S. MANTRI DEVELOPERS PVT. LTD.,
    MANTRI HOUSE, VITTAL MALLYA ROAD
    BENGALURU CITY
    BENGALURU - 560 001.

3 . SMT. SNEHAL SUSHIL MANTRI
    W/O SHRI SUSHIL MANTRI
    AGED ABOUT 48 YEARS
                            2



     MANAGING DIRECTOR
     M/S. MANTRI DEVELOPERS PVT. LTD.,
     MANTRI HOUSE, VITTAL MALLYA ROAD
     BENGALURU CITY
     BENGALURU - 560 001.
                                             ... PETITIONERS

(BY SRI C.V.NAGESH, SENIOR ADVOCATE A/W.,
    SRI MAHESH S., ADVOCATE)

AND:

1.   THE STATE OF KARNATAKA BY
     SUBRAMANYAPURA POLICE STATION
     BENGALURU CITY
     BENGALURU.

2.   MR. DHANANJAYA
     S/O LATE PADMANABHACHAR
     AGED ABOUT 38 YEARS
     RESIDENT OF 306, VS COZY APARTMENT
     AR LAYOUT, 28TH MAIN ROAD
     J.P.NAGAR, 6TH PHASE
     BENGALURU CITY
     KARNATAKA - 560 078.
                                            ... RESPONDENTS

(BY SMT. K.P.YASHODHA, HCGP FOR R-1;
    SRI DHANANJAYA, PARTY-IN-PERSON R-2)

     THIS WRIT PETITION IS FILED UNDER
ARTICLES 226
AND
227
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA READ WITH SECTION 482 OF
THE CR.P.C., PRAYING TO QUASH THE COMPLAINT DTD.30.8.2020
AND RESULTANT FIR IN CRIME NO.163/2020 OF THE RESPONDENT
SUBRAMANYAPURA POLICE AGAINST THE PETITIONERS HEREIN
FOR THE LEGED OFFENCES PUNISHABLE UNDER SECTION 406,
420, 415, 417 AND 34 OF
IPC
VIDE ANNEXURE-A AND B TO THE
PETITION.
                            3




IN WRIT PETITION No.7855 OF 2023 (GM-RES)

BETWEEN:

1.   SRI SUSHIL PANDURANG MANTRI
     S/O SRI PANDURANGA MANTRI
     AGED ABOUT 60 YEARS
     DIRECTOR OF MANTRI DEVELOPERS PVT. LTD.,
     NO.18, MANTRI ALTIUS NO.17
     RAJ BHAVAN ROAD
     BENGALURU - 560 001.

2.   M/S. CASTLES VISTA PRIVATE LIMITED
     REGISTERED UNDER THE COMPANIES ACT, 2014
     (SUBSIDIARY OF M/S. MANTRI DEVELOPERS PVT LTD)
     REPRESENTED BY AUTHORISED SIGNATORY
     ACCOUNTS DEPUTY MANAGER
     RAVI SHANKAR
     R/O NO.41, VITTAL MALLYA ROAD
     BENGALURU - 560 001.

3.   M/S. MANTRI DEVELOPERS PVT. LTD.,
     REGISTERED UNDER THE COMPANIES ACT, 1956
     REPRESENTED BY AUTHORISED SIGNATORY
     ACCOUNTS DEPUTY MANAGER
     RAVI SHANKAR
     R/O NO.41, VITTAL MALLYA ROAD
     BENGALURU - 560 001.

4.   M/S. BUOYANT TECHNOLOGY
     CONSTELLATIONS PVT. LTD.,
     REPRESENTED BY AUTHORISED SIGNATORY
     ACCOUNTS DEPUTY MANAGER
     RAVI SHANKAR
     R/O NO.41, VITTAL MALLYA ROAD
     BENGALURU - 560 001.
                                            ... PETITIONERS
                           4



(BY SRI C.V.NAGESH, SENIOR ADVOCATE A/W.,
   SRI MAHESH S., ADVOCATE)

AND:

1 . DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCEMENT
    REP. BY ITS JOINT DIRECTOR
    GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
    MINISTRY OF FINANCE
    DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE
    BENGALURU ZONAL OFFICE
    3RD FLOOR, 'B' BLOCK,
    BMTC, SHANTHINAGAR, K.H.ROAD
    BENGALURU - 560 027.

2 . THE ASSISTANT DIRECTOR
    DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCEMENT
    GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
    MINISTRY OF FINANCE
    DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE
    BENGALURU ZONAL OFFICE
    3RD FLOOR, 'B' BLOCK,
    BMTC, SHANTHINAGAR, K.H.ROAD
    BENGALURU - 560 027.
                                            ... RESPONDENTS

(BY SRI MADHUKAR DESHPANDE, SPL.PP)

     THIS WRIT PETITION IS FILED UNDER
ARTICLES 226
AND
227
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA READ WITH SECTION 482 OF
CR.P.C., PRAYING TO QUASH THE ENTIRE PROCEEDINGS PENDING
BEFORE THE HONBLE PRINCIPAL CITY CIVIL AND SESSIONS JUDGE
AND SPL. JUDGE FOR PREVENTION OF MONEY LAUNDERING ACT,
BENGALURU IN SPL. C. C. NO. 2874/2022 FOR THE ALLEGED
OFFENCES UNDER SEC 3 PUNISHABLE UNDER SEC 4 OF
PREVENTION OF MONEY LAUNDERING ACT, 2002 AND ALL ITS
FURTHER PROCEEDINGS VIDE ANNEXURE-B.
                                 5



   THESE WRIT PETITIONS HAVING BEEN HEARD AND RESERVED
FOR ORDERS ON 26.07.2023, COMING ON FOR PRONOUNCEMENT
THIS DAY, THE COURT MADE THE FOLLOWING:-


                               ORDER
W.P.No.10258 of 2020:
The petitioners are before this Court calling in question

registration of a crime in Crime No.163 of 2020 for offences

punishable
Sections 406
,
420
,
415
,
417
r/w 34 of the
IPC
.
2. The petitioners claim to be Directors of M/s.Mantri

Developers Pvt. Ltd., a builder and a land development Company.
It is the averment in the petition that the petitioners have delivered

scores of projects all over the country. The 2nd respondent is the

complainant.     The 2nd respondent and few other members -
investment based purchasers approached the petitioners/Company

seeking purchase of flats in the project "Mantri Serenity" and

accordingly applied for allotment of flats. Pursuant to the offer, the

complainant and other members execute certain agreements for

sale of undivided share of land and construction agreement inter

alia.   The project does not get completed in time, there is delay.
6
Due to the said delay, the complainant flags certain dishonest

intentions and the averment in the petition is that he began to

register threats and several complaints before various fora.                It is

the claim in the petition that due to intervening circumstances of

recessions, complaints to the Karnataka State Pollution Control

Board and other irregularities had resulted in delay of the project.
The project gets completed and occupancy certificate is also

received by the Authorities.       The complainant moves the Real

Estate Regulatory Authority ('RERA' for short) on several grievances

and seeks to register a complaint before the jurisdictional police for

the afore-quoted offences.
3.   The   complaint   was       that   they    are   the   unfortunate

homebuyers in 'Mantri Serenity' promoted by Mantri Castles Pvt.
Ltd., an associate and subsidiary of Mantri Developers Pvt. Ltd.,

The complaint narrates that he has paid more than Rs.69 lakhs as

per construction link plan and other homebuyers have paid Rs.60-

70 lakhs on an average or higher.                    The complaint alleges

misrepresentation,   money    laundering        and     fraud     against    the

homebuyers on the ground that the homes have not been given at
7
the   appropriate    time    and      the   funds   collected   from    all    the

homebuyers have been utilized, diverted or misutilised for several

other purposes.       It further claims that the property that the

homebuyers should get have already been mortgaged to several

Banks for the purpose of securing loan and the loan secured have

been invested to some other purpose.                  Based upon the said

complaint, a crime comes to be registered in Crime No.163 of 2020

for offences punishable under Sections as afore-quoted.                       After

registration of the crime, the petitioners knock at the doors of this

Court in the subject petition. This Court grants an interim order of

stay of further investigation against the petitioners.                 The said

interim order of stay is in subsistence even as on date.
4. Heard the learned senior counsel Sri.C.V.Nagesh appearing

for   the   petitioners,    learned    High   Court    Government       Pleader

appearing     for   respondent         No.1    and     Sri.Dhananjaya,         2nd

respondent/party-in- person.
5. The learned senior counsel by taking Court through the

documents appended to the petition and several other documents
8
either by the petitioners or by the 2nd respondent-complainant

would seek to demonstrate that the entire issue arises out of a

contract between the developers and builders of "Mantri Serenity"
and the complainant or any other homebuyer/home investor. It is

his emphatic submission that there is no element of cheating,

criminal breach of trust or any other offence so alleged against the

petitioners present by way of ingredients in the complaint so

registered. The allegation of the complainant is that the flats have

not been delivered in time. Owing to certain delay when the flats

were not delivered, the complainant/homebuyer is everywhere. He

has knocked at the doors of every Authority.         The impugned

complaint narrates several circumstances which are not even

necessary for consideration of the issue in the complaint. It is the

allegation that the apartments that are allotted to the complainant

and the like are already mortgaged to several Banks and therefore,

there is fraud and misappropriation or misutilisation of the funds

that the homebuyers have invested. He would submit that this is a

permissible exercise in the construction of apartments, as if finance

has to be raised from financial institutions the properties will have

to be mortgaged. It is his contention that the complainant is not a
9
novice, he is aware of all the nuances of buying a house in an

apartment complex and has therefore, signed several agreements.
The learned senior counsel would seek to place reliance upon the

following judgments of the Apex Court contending that in a matter

that is purely contractual between the victim and the accused,

criminal law is sought to be set into motion.
(
i)     SARABJIT KAUR V. STATE OF PUNJAB
- 2023(2) RCR

        (CRIMINAL) 52-MANU/SC/0193/2023
(
ii)    PRAKASH   AGGARWAL     V.   GANSH       BENZOPLAST   LTD.
,   -
MANU/SC/0470/2023
(iii)   RAMESH CHANDRA GUPTA V. STATE OF U.P. - 2022(4)

        CRIMES 573 (SC) - MANU/SC/1551/2022
(iv)    SMART OWNERS SERVICES INDIA PVT. LTD., V. STATE OF

        KARNATAKA - CRLP.6199 OF 2020
(v)     GOVINDARAJA V. STATE OF KARNATAKA - W.P.NO.101203

        OF 2021 - MANU/KA/0703/2022.
6. On the other hand, the complainant/2nd respondent-in-
person by elaborating the complaint and plethora documents placed
10
before this Court seeks to contend that the Directors of the

Company have indulged in money laundering, they have invested

the funds received by the homebuyers in several Banks by

mortgaging the property that the homebuyers is entitled to hold on

to. He would seek to contend that if this is not cheating, nothing

else can be termed to be cheating at the hands of the developers

qua the poor homebuyers. He would submit that the matter is still

at the stage of investigation and even the Enforcement Directorate

has initiated several proceedings against the petitioners, therefore,

the proceedings must be permitted to be continued against these

petitioners, as there are several issues that would spring up if

investigation is permitted. The respondent-in-person would seek to

rely on several interlocutory orders passed by the co-ordinate

benches of this Court seeking to contend that this Court had

directed to resolve the issue amicably by executing sale deeds in

favour of every aggrieved homebuyer, but the petitioners have not

adhered to it and have thus committed contempt.
7. In reply, the learned senior counsel would submit that

every aggrieved homebuyer today has come forward and a sale
11
deed is executed in their favour, nobody has grievance whatsoever,

it is only the complainant who wants to project himself as messiah

of the homebuyers, wanting to continue litigation and not come

forward to execute the sale deed.        He would submit that the

demand of the complainant is something that 800 homebuyers

have not demanded and all the 800 homebuyers have come

forward to get the sale deeds registered in terms of the agreements

entered into between the developer and the homebuyers. It is only

the complainant who is wanting to throw a spanner in the spoke.
W.P.No.7855 of 2023:
8. The subject petition calls in question proceedings instituted

by the Enforcement Directorate. The facts that led to registration

of an Enforcement Case Information Report (ECIR) is the same as is

found in the companion petition.       The Enforcement Directorate

takes queue from crime No.163 of 2020 registered on 30-08-2020.
Therefore, the offence in the ECIR is an offshoot of the complaint so

registered by the respondent-in-person in the companion petition,

so to say, that the predicate offence for the offence under the
Prevention of Money Laundering Act
is the FIR in Crime No.163 of
12
2020.     Therefore, the right of the Enforcement Directorate to

continue against the petitioners would be subject to the result of

the proceedings in W.P.No.10258 of 2020 wherein Crime No.163 of

2020 registered against the petitioners is called in question.
Therefore, I deem it appropriate to notice the facts and contentions

after arriving at a decision on the challenge to the crime in Crime

No.163 of 2020.
9. I have given my anxious consideration to the submissions

made by the respective learned counsel and have perused the

material available on record.
10. The afore-narrated facts are not in dispute. The 2nd

respondent is the complainant and his status of being the

homebuyer is not in dispute. He along with others claims to have

invested money as a homebuyer to the tune of Rs.69 lakhs and

there is delay in the project of the petitioners.   Since the entire

issue has sprung from the complaint so registered under
Section

154
of the Cr.P.C., I deem it appropriate to notice the complaint in

its entirety. The complaint reads as follows:
13
"FIRST INFORMATION REPORT (FIR)


To,

Sub-Inspector of Police,
Subramanyapura, Bengaluru

Subject: Criminal Complaint for failed delivery and
possession of flats against the depositors (Home
buyers) moneys and /Information
u/s 154
Cr.P.C.
against Mantri Developers Pvt Ltd, its promoters
/founders, erstwhile directors and the Mantri Castles
Pvt Ltd, its directors, erstwhile directors and key
managerial personnel associated with the above two
companies

Complainant's Name. Mr Dhananjaya and other home
buyers as listed in the annexure herein under Mr
Dhananjaya S/o Sri Late Padmanabhachar aged 38
and presently in employment with Pvt sector in IT
Services in Bangalore residing at #306, VS Cozy
Apartment, AR Layout, 28th A Main Road, JP Nagar 6th
Phase, Bengaluru-560078

Name of Accused....
1.       Mr. Sushil Pandurang Mantri, Erstwhile
         Managing Director, Founder and Promoter
         director of Mantri Developers Pvt. Ltd.,
         having Director (DIN 00188967) aged
         around 60 years Mantri House, No. 41,
         Vittal Mallya Road, Bangalore-560001.
2.       Mr. Pratik Sushil Mantri, Son of Promoter
         director, aged 30 Years Mantri Developers
         Pvt. Ltd., Mantri House, No. 41, Vittal Mallya
         Road, Bangalore-560001 and now the
         current position is unknown.
3.       Mrs Snehal Mantri - Wife of Mr Sushil
         Pandurang Mantri, Promoter director of
         Mantri Developers Pvt Limited (MDPL) -
14
Aged around 52-53 and now the current
                 position is unknown
4.          Mr Subramanian Bhaskaran Director on
                 Mantri Castles Pvt Ltd (formerly Land Master
                 Realtors Pvt Ltd) having Director (DIN
                 02078787), Bangalore working at the office
                 of Mantri Developers Pvt. Ltd., Mantri
                 House, No. 41, Vittal Mallya Road,
                 Bangalore-560001
5.           Mr Bharat Dixit Madhukar Director on
                 Mantri Castles Pvt Ltd (formerly Land
                 Masters Realtors Pvt Ltd)/Bangalore and
                 current employment and designation is not
                 known having Director (DIN 08263379)
                 working at the office of Mantri Developers
                 Pvt. Ltd., Mantri House, No. 41. Vittal Mallya
                 Road, Bangalore-560001

      And other parties associated with the project named
and unnamed to the extent known to us.
•   Parties involved      in     Joint    development
              agreement:

                 o   Gokulam Shelters Pvt Ltd

                 o   Land Masters Realtors Pvt Ltd

                 o   ISKCON Charities

                 o   India Heritage      Trust   (India   Heritage
                     Foundation)


          •   Parties involved in Agreements:

                 o   Mantri Castles Pvt Ltd now knowns as
                     Castle Vistas Pvt Ltd

                 o   Gokulam Shelters Pvt Ltd
15
•   Money Paid to Companies:

                o   Mantri Castles Pvt Ltd

         •   RERA Registration Nos:

                o   Serenity1: PRM/KA/RERA/1251/310/PR/
171019/000494
o    Serenity3: PRM/KA/RERA/1251/310/PR/
171016/000500
o   Serenity4: PRM/KA/RERA/1251/310/PR/
171016/000502
o    Serenity5: PRM/KA/RERA/1251/310/PR/
171019/000504
•   Project is at :: (Cause of Action)

                o   Mantri Serenity on Kanakapura Road,
                    Bangalore
Complaint of Offence under
Section 415
&
420
(Cheating)
of the I.P.C.
The aforementioned complainant(s) begs to state as
under: -
1. That the complainant(s) are resident of Bangalore
at various locations and from other parts of India and
overseas.
2. That all the accused are resident of Bangalore and
working in Mantri Corporate office at Vittala Malya Road,
Bangalore
3. Brief Facts leading to commission of the offence and
allegation against the Promoter/founder directors erstwhile
directors and key Managerial Personnel.
16
I am/we are one/some of unfortunate Home buyers in
Mantri Serenity promoted by Mantri Castles Pvt Ltd (formerly
known as Land Masters Realtors Pvt Ltd), which is an
associate company and or subsidiary of Mantri Developers
Private Ltd (MDPL) (Holding Company). I myself paid more
than Rs 69 Lakhs so far as per construction linked plan.
Many of Home buyer have paid Rs 60-70 Lakhs on an
average or higher (Including Bank Borrowed in an existing
Mantri Serenity project at Kanakapura Road. As per our
rough estimate, there are other home buyers of over 1200
families together invested Rs 1350 Crores approximately
(Home buyers and Bank/NBFCs (Piramal Finance).
4. Launching various Ponzi schemes and in collusion
with the arrangement with Various banks known and in
known including PNB Housing, ICICI, HDFC and such other
banks and Non banking financial companies (NBFC), window
dressing and rosily painted schemes induced many home
buyers showing misleading brochures, falsification of delivery
time lines under various subvention schemes. Flats are not
delivered even after seven to ten years after taking Home
buyer deposits. We are ordinary common middle-class
citizens and Project is stalled for the last two years. We
suspect a big scam of financial bungling, fraud, cheating.
funds diversion and money laundering etc. All these are acts
of cheating punishable under
Section 420
of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860-

      Some of Misrepresentation, Money laundering, Fraud
against Home buyers

             Misrepresentation of Varying timelines in the
             same tower and in the same floor

             Advance money for 50% flats received in 2013
             to 2015 itself even before migrating to RERA
             when the project is 2-5 years old Booking on
             15th at 2013

             Window dressing and rosily painted schemes
             with incentives never honoured as of date
17
Unilateral and arbitrary documentation with no
            exit clause except with huge penalty.
Some of flats are registered even before
            completion from 2012-2018 in violation of BBMP
            norms and not completed even today

            Swapping of non-existent flats from other
            apartments from developers and within Serenity
            transfer to other flats at new rates
5. Complaint against the Promoters, founders,
directors of Mantri Developers Pvt Ltd and or Mantri Castles
Pvt Ltd and such other associate group companies and
entities and against their key managerial personnel we allege
that the Accused no.1, Mr. Sushil Pandurang Mantri, Accused
no. 2, Mr. Pratik Sushil Mantri & Accused No. 3. Mrs Snehal
Mantri, the erstwhile executive director of MDPL and such
other Director(s) of Mantri Developers Pvt. Ltd and known
business associates, partners associated with the Project
serenity and also unknown Key Managerial personnel who
have indulged in cheating, criminal breach of trust with
regards to the Home buyers deposits for the project named -
"Mantri     Serenity"     [hereinafter    referred   to    as
"Project"/"Serenity" as the case may be J.
6. There is a suspected case of money laundering,
diversion of funds and collusion Cheating and diverted our
money for their own personal usage or such other fraudulent
purposes and thereby depriving the funds for Construction
and hence stalled the project for the last two years since
2018-19. Govts and courts to help us to save our money give
us our dream homes and investigate Mantri Developer Group
misdeeds before they escape to foreign shores (An article
published in Jayakirana news paper on 28th August 2020)
7. Due to the behaviour and collusive nature of the
business transactions with their associates of the Accused,
the Complainant has suffered financial loss to the tune of
(mention the amount in Rupees). Home buyers are incurring
huge EMI costs of Rs 40 000 pm (minimum) and rent on
leased homes for stay Rs 20000 (minimum) together coming
to Rs 60000 pm or Say 720000 per annum and lost
18
approximately 25 Lakhs on my opportune cost of additional
interest and rents even with out delivery of our homes
Interest and rent home buyers are all forced to pay due to
delayed delivery of homes due to their negligence,
inefficiency and failure to do fiduciary responsibility in taking
care of public money by Mantri group of companies.
8. Many middle class, senior citizens, Housewives have
invested their hard-earned life savings and including bank
borrowable in spite facing a lot of hardships. Being ordinary
citizens, we are not familiar with the detailed verification of
their financial dealings and agreements. We sincerely pray to
do justice to deliver our homes and also reasonable
compensation for the delay period as per the guidelines from
Supreme court or consumer forums etc whatever be deemed
fit after the detailed investigation of cheating, fraud and
collusion.
9. Date or period when the offence took place: During
2010-2017 for group. (Vide remittances were made for Rs 70
lakhs to Rs One crore for each flat at varying periods).
10. The Complainant has requested the accused
several times to reimburse the amount of loss suffered by
him/her, in some cases honouring the agreements
commitments but to no avail
11. We have heard bad news in paper this month
related to Mantri Developers which is making us worried and
concerned about our home and our invested money: -
•    ICICI Bank takes possession of Mantri
              Corporate      office   -   on    10th    August
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/in
              dia-     business/icici-bank-takes-possession-of-
              mantri-corporate-
office/articleshow/77457894.cms

          •   An article came in news paper "Jayakirana" on
              28th August 2020 which is little scary for us.
              The article questions, if Mantri founders
              planning to escape from the country!! The
19
printed copy of the PDF we received is attached
                  with this complaint.
12. That the Complainant submits that no suit has
     been filed by the following before any other court in territory
     of India in relation to this complaint.
13.The complainant, therefore, prays that-
(a) appropriate proceeding be initiated against the
     accused under
Section 415
and
420
of the Cr.P.C..
(b) A detailed investigation of the usage of Home
     buyers deposit funds for the project and on such
     investigation a proper follow up action by the police.
(c) the accused be convicted of the offence under
Section 420
of the IPC.
(d) the accused be ordered to deliver our homes with
     in next 6 months along with for delay as per Supreme Court
     directions or refund of all moneys with bank rate of interest
     and pay compensation for monetary loss suffered by
     complainant to the tune of Rs 25,00,000 for each home
     buyer or flat towards damages and unspecified damages to
     defray he financial hardships and sufferings.
(e) any other relief/(s) or settlement be granted as it
     may deem fit and proper in the said circumstances."
What can be gathered from the complaint is, the complainant

describes himself to be an unfortunate homebuyer and seeks to

demonstrate various aspects of misrepresentation on the part of the

petitioners. The crux lies in the 4th paragraph. It is alleged that

several ponzi schemes are launched in collusion and arrangements
20
with various Banks and other non-banking financial Companies.
Brochures notified by them are misleading, flats are not delivered

even after 7-10 years after taking deposits from the homebuyers.
A case of suspected money laundering was also sought to be made

out by the complainant. A little history to the complaint is required

to be noticed.
11. The Mantri Senenity notified calling for expressions of

interest from various citizens who were interested to buy homes.
The complainant also applied for an allotment. The application for

allotment of the complainant is dated 10.10.2013. The details of

unit applied for allotment and the other demand of the complainant

is depicted in the application for allotment. A sum of Rs.7,18,540/-
was deposited towards the booking amount.           An agreement is

entered into between the parties. The agreement is between one

Gokulam Shelters and Mantri Castles Pvt. Ltd., Certain clauses of

the agreement which are germane are required to be noticed.
Clauses 8 and 1 of the agreement reads as follows:
"8. The purchaser has also simultaneously entered into a
      separate Agreement for Construction with the Developer,
      whereunder he/she/they/it has/have agreed to get constructed,
21
as per the Scheme, a residential apartment described in
     Annexure B1 to the said Agreement, and both Agreement for
     sale of undivided interest and Agreement for construction shall
     be co-terminus and together constitute one contract, whether or
     not a sale deed in pursuance hereof is executed."
...             ....          ....
"1.0 That in pursuance of the foregoing and in
     consideration of the sum set out in Annexure A1 having been
     agreed to be paid by the Purchaser in installments and the
     mutual obligation/s undertaken by the Parties hereto, the Owner
     and Developer agrees to sell and the Purchaser agrees to
     purchase the undivided right, title and interest within the plinth
     area of the respective building on which the apartment/building
     is constructed in the land comprised in Phase-2 which forms a
     part of the Schedule A Property, more fully described in
     Annexure A1."
Clause 11.1 reads as follows:
"11.1 That the Owner is the absolute owner of the
     Annexure A1 Property having thereto a legally subsisting and
     marketable title and its sale to the Purchaser shall be free from
     all encumbrances, court attachment or acquisition proceedings
     or charges of any kind. The/Developer may obtain a Project
     loan for the construction of the residential complex as referred
     to herein, based on the security of the Schedule Property, which
     shall be discharged before handing over possession of the
     Apartment to the Purchaser.         The Schedule Property and
     construction thereon, in so far as it relates to the Purchaser,
     shall be free from all claims and encumbrances of whatsoever
     nature;"
What is depicted in the agreement is seen and accepted by the

complainant, as the complainant has also signed the document.
Next comes the agreement for construction. These conditions are
22
also accepted and the complainant signs on the document. Though

6-7 years have passed by, the apartments are not delivered. It is

then the complainant seeks to knock at the doors of RERA and

several other fora   and then registers the aforesaid crime.      After

registration of the crime, the petitioners have preferred the subject

petition and this Court has interdicted further investigation.   A slew

of orders are passed by this Court from time to time.        One such

order assumes significance and is required to be noticed and the

order is dated 01.06.2023 which reads as follows:
"Heard learned Senior Counsel Sri C.V. Nagesh appearing
      for the petitioners. There are several orders passed by this
      Court; two of which assumes significance and therefore, are
      necessary to be noticed, one which is passed on 20th March,
      2023 and the other passed on 29th March, 2023. Order dated
      20th March, 2023 reads as under:
"ORDER

             Learned senior counsel representing the petitioners in
      W.P. Nos.33479/2019, 33485/2019, 33488/2019, 10258/2020
      and 10286/2020 (henceforth referred to as the 'Developer')
      submits that 11 customers, who are the complainants in the
      F.I.R., are yet to make payments and that sale deed/s
      conveying their respective flat would be executed within four
      working days from the date of making such payment. He also
      assured the Court that in the sale deeds that may be executed,
      the corresponding undivided interest of each flat shall be
      mentioned. He also submitted that in respect of those
      customers who have already made the complete payment and in
      whose favour, the sale deeds are executed, possession of the
      flats would be delivered by Monday and in respect of those
      customers who have already paid full value of the flats, sale
23
deeds would be executed latest by Monday and that in all these
sale deeds, the undivided interest corresponding to flats would
be mentioned in the sale deeds.
It is made clear that the customers who are yet to make
payment shall make it as early as possible so that the Developer
can execute the sale deeds latest by 27.03.2023. Wherever
payments are made, the Developer shall execute the sale deeds
as undertaken before the Court It is needless to mention that
the Developer shall circulate copies of the draft sale deeds by
25.03.2023. The Developer shall hand over possession wherever
sale deeds are executed.
List on 28.03.2023.
If interim order is granted in any of these cases and if it is
in force, the same shall stand extended, till the next date of
hearing.
Order dated 29th March, 2023 reads as under:
"ORDER

      In   W.P.No.10258/2020,       learned   Senior   Counsel
representing the petitioners submits that though the petitioners
have a good case on merits, yet the petitioners intend to
amicably resolve the issue.
Learned counsel for respondent No.2, however contends
that respondent No.2 and similarly placed persons were
accorded cold reception in the office of the petitioners and
therefore, this Court may take suitable decision in the matter.
Since the petitioners have expressed their desire to settle the
dispute amicably, this Court consider it appropriate to direct the
petitioners to hold a meeting with respondent No.2 and the
persons named in the complaint in Crime No.163/2020 of
Subramanyapura        Police     Station     on      05.04.2023.
In order to ensure that the petitioners addresses the concern of
respondent No.2 and complainants in Crime No.163/2020, this
Court consider it appropriate to direct the Member, Karnataka
State Legal Services Authority to be present in the meeting.
Hence, the following:
24
ORDER
i) Petitioners are directed to hold a meeting with
      respondent No.2 and the complainants in Crime
      No.163/2020 at 11.00 a.m., on 05.04.2023 at the Office
      of the petitioners at Mantri Developers Pvt. Ltd., Mantri
      House, No.41, Vittal Mallya Road, Bengaluru - 560 001.
ii) The Member, Karnataka State Legal Services Authority
      shall be present at the meeting and also moderate the
      discussions and thereafter furnish a report to this Court
      regarding    the    proceedings      of    the      meeting.
Interim order granted earlier is extended till the next date
      of hearing.
List these petitions on 06.04.2023."
In terms of the said orders, the learned Senior Counsel
submits that out of seventeen home buyers who had complained
of non-registration of sale deeds, fourteen sale deeds have been
registered; two of them are abroad and therefore those sale
deeds are not registered and the one that remains is the
respondent party-in-person. The learned Senior Counsel would
submit that insofar as the sale deeds that have not been
registered of the remaining complainants, those sale deeds
would also be executed forthwith subject to the condition that
they would fulfill the criteria of payment as is observed by this
Court in the aforesaid order dated 20th March, 2023.
Respondent party-in-person would contend that the sale deeds
have been executed but without undivided share, which is
contrary to law. If that be so, it is contrary to the order passed
by this Court.
Learned Senior Counsel would submit that the sale deeds
have been executed with undivided share and that same would
be executed in favour of the respondent party-in-person.
Learned Senior Counsel would further submit that in cases
where sale deeds are executed, possession is not handed over
and it shall be delivered forthwith on the condition that they
would clear all the dues of payment, as the case would be. The
submission is placed on record.
25
The respondent shall be at the office of the petitioners at
      10.30 pm on 05th June, 2023 and without any hindrance, if all
      payment is made by the respondent party-in-person, the sale
      deed shall be executed at 3.00 pm on the said date and the
      same shall be produced before this Court on the next date of
      hearing.
List the matter on 06th June, 2023 at 2.30 p.m. for further
      hearing.
Interim order subsisting as on the date, stands extended
      till the next date of hearing."
This Court recorded the earlier orders passed by the co-ordinate

Bench and while observing that the petitioners have expressed their

desire to settle the dispute amicably, the Court considers it

appropriate to direct the petitioners to hold a meeting with the

complainant.    Therefore, this Court had passed the afore-quoted

order that the sale deed would be executed forthwith without any

hindrance. Every other aggrieved person like the complainant has

come forward and the sale deed is executed, but the complainant

refuses to accede to the execution of sale deed.          The reason the

complainant projects is that they have been not given the undivided

share as is necessary in law.
26
12. The learned senior counsel for the petitioners, on the

strength of the documents, has sought to demonstrate that in case

of every other person sale deed is already executed.              If 1800

homebuyers have executed a sale deed of a particular nature, the

complainant, prima facie, cannot seem to ask something beyond

what the agreement says or beyond what this Court has indicated

on 29-03-2023, be those as they may. The question that requires

consideration is, whether on these issues can the criminal law that

is set into motion be permitted to be continued? Therefore, I deem

it appropriate to notice the offences alleged against the petitioners,

they are
Sections 406
,
420
,
417
of the IPC.
Section 406
of the IPC

deals with criminal breach of trust, ingredients of which are found in
Section 405
of the IPC and it reads as follows:
"405. Criminal breach of trust.--Whoever, being in any
      manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion over
      property, dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own
      use that property, or dishonestly uses or disposes of that
      property in violation of any direction of law prescribing the mode
      in which such trust is to be discharged, or of any legal contract,
      express or implied, which he has made touching the discharge
      of such trust, or wilfully suffers any other person so to do,
      commits "criminal breach of trust".
Explanation 1 -- A person, being an employer 3 of an
      establishment whether exempted under
section 17
of the
      Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act,
      1952 (19 of 1952) or not who deducts the employee's
27
contribution from the wages payable to the employee for credit
      to a Provident Fund or Family Pension Fund established by any
      law for the time being in force, shall be deemed to have been
      entrusted with the amount of the contribution so deducted by
      him and if he makes default in the payment of such contribution
      to the said Fund in violation of the said law, shall be deemed to
      have dishonestly used the amount of the said contribution in
      violation of a direction of law as aforesaid.
Explanation 2.-- A person, being an employer, who
      deducts the employees' contribution from the wages payable to
      the employee for credit to the Employees' State Insurance Fund
      held and administered by the Employees' State Insurance
      Corporation established under the
Employees' State Insurance
      Act, 1948
(34 of 1948), shall be deemed to have been entrusted
      with the amount of the contribution so deducted by him and if
      he makes default in the payment of such contribution to the said
      Fund in violation of the said Act, shall be deemed to have
      dishonestly used the amount of the said contribution in violation
      of a direction of law as aforesaid."
Section 405
of the IPC mandates that whoever entrusted with the

property, dishonestly misappropriates or converts it to his own use,

would become punishable under
Section 406
of the IPC for criminal

breach of trust. The other allegation is cheating under
Section 420
of the IPC. To drive home the offence of cheating under
Section 420
of the IPC, the ingredients of
Section 415
of the IPC will have to be

satisfied.
Section 415
of the IPC reads as follows:
"415. Cheating.--Whoever, by deceiving any person,
      fraudulently or dishonestly induces the person so deceived to
      deliver any property to any person, or to consent that any
28
person shall retain any property, or intentionally induces the
      person so deceived to do or omit to do anything which he would
      not do or omit if he were not so deceived, and which act or
      omission causes or is likely to cause damage or harm to that
      person in body, mind, reputation or property, is said to "cheat".
Explanation.--A dishonest concealment of facts is a
      deception within the meaning of this section."
Whoever by deceiving any person fraudulently or dishonestly

induces the person to deliver any property to the accused, the

victim is said to have cheated. Therefore, the soul of the provision

is dishonest intention from the inception of the transaction.
13. Beyond
Sections 406
and
420
of the IPC, what is alleged

is
Section 417
of the IPC as well. Section 417 deals with

punishment for cheating. Therefore, it need not be separately dealt

with, as the ingredients of
Section 415
of the IPC are necessary to

be present even in an offence alleged under
Section 417
of the IPC.
Section 415 is the definition and not the offence, therefore, it is

wrongly laid in the crime.
14. The complaint is as extracted hereinabove. The allegation

is that the petitioners are not adhering to grant of an undivided
29
share in the property in terms of the agreement.            Wherefrom

criminal      breach   of   trust   or   cheating   would   emerge    is

ununderstandable. The complainant is also a homebuyer like every

other homebuyer. All other homebuyers have got their properties

registered on execution of the sale deed.       If the execution of the

sale deed is not accepted by the complainant, it cannot mean that it

would become a criminal breach of trust or cheating, as the case

would be, as there is no dishonest intention right from the inception

of the transaction by the petitioners.
15. The Apex Court, in plethora of judgments, has considered

the aspect of breach of contract and has clearly held that a criminal

law cannot be set into motion on mere breach of contract.            The

Apex Court in the case of
SUSHIL SETHI v. STATE OF

ARUNACHAL PRADESH1
holds as follows:-
"8.1. As observed hereinabove, the charge-sheet
         has been filed against the appellants for the offences
         under Section 420 read with
Section 120-B
IPC. However,
         it is required to be noted that there are no specific
         allegations and averments in the FIR and/or even in the
         charge-sheet that fraudulent and dishonest intention of
         the accused was from the very beginning of the
         transaction. It is also required to be noted that contract
1
(2020) 3 SCC 240
30
between M/s SPML Infra Limited and the Government
        was for supply and commissioning of the Nurang Hydel
        Power Project including three power generating units.
The appellants purchased the turbines for the project
        from another manufacturer. The company used the said
        turbines in the power project. The contract was in the
        year 1993. Thereafter in the year 1996 the project was
        commissioned. In the year 1997, the Department of
        Power issued a certificate certifying satisfaction over the
        execution of the project. Even the defect liability period
        ended/expired in January 1998. In the year 2000, there
        was some defect found with respect to three turbines.
        Immediately, the turbines were replaced.
The power
        project started functioning right from the very
        beginning--1996 onwards. If the intention of the
        company/appellants was to cheat the Government of
        Arunachal Pradesh, they would not have replaced the
        turbines which were found to be defective. In any case,
        there are no specific allegations and averments in the
        complaint that the accused had fraudulent or dishonest
        intention at the time of entering into the contract.
        Therefore, applying the law
laid down by
this Court in the
        aforesaid decisions, it cannot be said that even a prima
        facie case for the offence under
Section 420
IPC has been
        made out."
(Emphasis supplied)

        Later, the Apex Court in the case of
MITESH KUMAR J.SHA

V. STATE OF KARNATAKA2
holds as follows:
"28. In the instant case, the complaint levelled against
        the Appellants herein is one which involves commission of
        offences of criminal breach of trust and cheating. While a
        criminal breach of trust as postulated under section 405 of the
        Penal Code, 1860, entails misappropriation or conversion of
        another's property for one's own use, with a dishonest intention,
        cheating too on the other hand as an offence defined under
        section 415 of the Penal Code, 1860, involves an ingredient of
        having a dishonest or fraudulent intention which is aimed at
2
2021 SCC OnLine SC 976
31
inducing the other party to deliver any property to a specific
person. Both the sections clearly prescribed 'dishonest
intention', as a pre-condition for even prima facie establishing
the commission of said offences. Thus, in order to assess the
relevant contentions made by the parties herein, the question
whether actions of the Appellants were committed in
furtherance of a dishonest or fraudulent scheme is one which
requires scrutiny.
29. Coming to the facts of the case at hands, the
contested contention between the parties is that the
builder company had sold four excess flats beyond its
share, in terms of the JDA and supplementary agreement
entered into between the parties. Respondent No. 2
contends that builder company which was entitled to sell
only 9 flats in its favour, has instead executed sale deed
for 13 flats in total. Thus, the company simply could not
have sold the flats beyond 9 flats for which it was
authorized and resultantly cannot evade criminal liability
on a mere premise that a civil dispute is already pending
between the parties.
30. The Appellants on the other hand contend that in
terms of a subsequent MoU dated 19.02.15, it was mutually
agreed between the parties, that partial payment for a loan
amount borrowed by Respondent No. 2 from Religare Finvest
Ltd., would be paid out from the sale proceeds of the said
development project undertaken by both the parties. Pursuant
to this MoU, the Appellants had agreed to get an NOC for 15
flats by making payment of Rs. 40,00,000/- for each flat.
31. The key contention, and also the central point of
dispute, made by the Appellants is that, it was specifically
agreed between the parties that the Appellants would be
entitled to sell additional flats beyond their share, as
adjustments for payment made to Religare Finvest Ltd. on
behalf of Respondent No. 2. It is further contended that
Respondent No. 2 had also agreed to execute a ratification deed
to the JDA and GPA eventually, which would have formally
authorised the Appellants to sell additional apartments.
....    ....        ....   ....
32
Whether sale of excess flats even if made amounts to a mere
                               breach of contract?
39. This Court in the case of
Hridaya Ranjan Prasad
         Verma v. State of Bihar6
, has observed:--
"15. ....that the distinction between mere
                breach of contract and the offence of cheating is a
                fine one. It depends upon the intention of the
                accused at the time to inducement which may be
                judged by his subsequent conduct but for this
                subsequent conduct is not the sole test. Mere
                breach of contract cannot give rise to criminal
                prosecution for cheating unless fraudulent or
                dishonest intention is shown right at the beginning
                of the transaction, that is the time when the offence
                is said to have been committed. Therefore it is the
                intention which is the gist of the offence. To hold a
                person guilty of cheating it is necessary to show
                that he had fraudulent or dishonest intention at the
                time of making the promise..."
(Emphasis supplied)

         The Apex Court in the case of VIJAY KUMAR GHAI v.
STATE OF WEST BENGAL3 has held as follows:
"46. This Court in
G. Sagar Suri v. State of UP21
observed that it is the duty and obligation of the criminal
         court to exercise a great deal of caution in issuing the
         process, particularly when matters are essentially of civil
         nature.
47. This Court has time and again cautioned about
         converting purely civil disputes into criminal cases. This
         Court in Indian Oil Corporation (Supra) noticed the
         prevalent impression that civil law remedies are time
         consuming and do not adequately protect the interests of
         lenders/creditors. The Court further observed that:--
3
(2022) SCC Online SC 344
33
"13. ...any effort to settle civil disputes and
      claims, which do not involve any criminal offence,
      by applying pressure through criminal prosecution
      should be deprecated and discouraged."
48. At the outset, Respondent No. 2/Complainant
alleged that the Appellants were responsible for the
offence punishable under
Section 420
,
405
,
406
,
120B
IPC. Therefore, it is also imperative to examine the
ingredients of the said offences and whether the
allegations made in the complaint, read on their face,
attract those offences under the Penal Code.
49.
Section 405
of IPC defines Criminal Breach of Trust
which reads as under:--
"405. Criminal breach of trust.--Whoever, being in
      any manner entrusted with property, or with any
      dominion over property, dishonestly misappropriates or
      converts to his own use that property, or dishonestly uses
      or disposes of that property in violation of any direction of
      law prescribing the mode in which such trust is to be
      discharged, or of any legal contract, express or implied,
      which he has made touching the discharge of such trust,
      or wilfully suffers any other person so to do, commits
      "criminal breach of trust".
50. The essential ingredients of the offense of criminal
breach of trust are:--
(1) The accused must be entrusted with the
      property or with dominion over it,

            (2) The     person   so   entrusted   must   use   that
      property, or;
(3) The accused must dishonestly use or dispose of
      that property or wilfully suffer any other person to do so
      in violation,
(a) of any direction of law prescribing the mode in
            which such trust is to be discharged, or;
34
(b) of any legal contract made touching the discharge
            of such trust.
51. "Entrustment" of property under Section 405 of
the Penal Code, 1860 is pivotal to constitute an offence
under this. The words used are, 'in any manner entrusted
with property'. So, it extends to entrustments of all kinds
whether to clerks, servants, business partners or other
persons, provided they are holding a position of 'trust'. A
person    who dishonestly      misappropriates property
entrusted to them contrary to the terms of an obligation
imposed is liable for a criminal breach of trust and is
punished under Section 406 of the Penal Code.
52. The definition in the section does not restrict the
property to movables or immoveable alone. This Court in
R K
Dalmia v. Delhi Administration22
held that the word 'property' is
used in the Code in a much wider sense than the expression
'moveable property'. There is no good reason to restrict the
meaning of the word 'property' to moveable property only when
it is used without any qualification in Section 405.
53.
In
Sudhir Shantilal Mehta v. CBI23
it was observed
that the act of criminal breach of trust would, Interalia mean
using or disposing of the property by a person who is entrusted
with or has otherwise dominion thereover. Such an act must not
only be done dishonestly but also in violation of any direction of
law or any contract express or implied relating to carrying out
the trust.
54.
Section 415
of IPC define cheating which reads
as under:--
"415. Cheating.--Whoever, by deceiving any
      person, fraudulently or dishonestly induces the
      person so deceived to deliver any property to any
      person, or to consent that any person shall retain
      any property, or intentionally induces the person so
      deceived to do or omit to do anything which he
      would not do or omit if he were not so deceived,
      and which act or omission causes or is likely to
      cause damage or harm to that person in body,
      mind, reputation or property, is said to "cheat"."
35
55. The essential ingredients of the offense of cheating
are:
1. Deception of any person
2. (a) Fraudulently or dishonestly inducing that
       person-
(i) to deliver any property to any person : or
(ii) to consent that any person shall retain any
       property; or
(b) intentionally inducing that person to do or omit
       to do anything which he would not do or omit if he were
       no so deceived, and which act or omission causes or is
       likely to cause damage or harm to that person in body,
       mind, reputation or property.
56. A fraudulent or dishonest inducement is an essential
ingredient of the offence. A person who dishonestly induces
another person to deliver any property is liable for the offence of
cheating.
57.
Section 420
IPC defines cheating and dishonestly
inducing delivery of property which reads as under:--
"420. Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of
       property.--Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly
       induces the person deceived to deliver any property to
       any person, or to make, alter or destroy the whole or any
       part of a valuable security, or anything which is signed or
       sealed, and which is capable of being converted into a
       valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of
       either description for a term which may extend to seven
       years, and shall also be liable to fine."
58.
Section 420
IPC is a serious form of cheating that
includes inducement (to lead or move someone to happen) in
terms of delivery of property as well as valuable securities. This
section is also applicable to matters where the destruction of the
property is caused by the way of cheating or inducement.
36
Punishment for cheating is provided under this section which
may extend to 7 years and also makes the person liable to fine.
59. To establish the offence of Cheating in inducing
the delivery of property, the following ingredients need to
be proved:--
1. The representation made by the person
      was false
2. The accused had prior knowledge that the
      representation he made was false.
3. The accused made false representation
      with dishonest intention in order to deceive the
      person to whom it was made.
4. The act where the accused induced the
      person to deliver the property or to perform or to
      abstain from any act which the person would have
      not done or had otherwise committed.
...            ...            ...            ...
62. There can be no doubt that a mere breach of contract
is not in itself a criminal offence and gives rise to the civil
liability of damages. However, as held by this court in
Hridaya
Ranjan Prasad Verma v. State of Bihar26
, the distinction
between mere breach of contract and cheating, which is criminal
offence, is a fine one. While breach of contract cannot give rise
to criminal prosecution for cheating, fraudulent or dishonest
intention is the basis of the offence of cheating. In the case at
hand, complaint filed by the Respondent No. 2 does not disclose
dishonest or fraudulent intention of the appellants.
63.
In
Vesa Holdings Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Kerala27
, this
Court made the following observation:--
"13. It is true that a given set of facts may make
      out a civil wrong as also a criminal offence and only
      because a civil remedy may be available to the
      complainant that itself cannot be ground to quash a
      criminal proceeding. The real test is whether the
37
allegations in the complaint disclose the criminal offence
     of cheating or not. In the present case, there is nothing to
     show that at the very inception there was any inception
     on behalf of an accused person to cheat which is a
     condition precedent for an offence
u/s 420
IPC. In our
     view, the complaint does not disclose any criminal offence
     at all. Criminal proceedings should not be encouraged
     when it is found to be mala fide or otherwise an abuse of
     the process of the courts. Superior courts while exercising
     this power should also strive to serve the ends of justice.
     In our opinion, in view of these facts allowing the police
     investigation to continue would amount to an abuse of the
     process of the court and the High Court committed an
     error in refusing to exercise the power under
Section 482
Cr.P.C to quash the proceedings."
64. Having gone through the complaint/FIR and
even the chargesheet, it cannot be said that the
averments in the FIR and the allegations in the complaint
against the appellant constitute an offence under Section
405 & 420 Penal Code, 1860. Even in a case where
allegations are made in regard to failure on the part of
the accused to keep his promise, in the absence of a
culpable intention at the time of making promise being
absent, no offence under
Section 420
IPC can be said to
have been made out. In the instant case, there is no
material to indicate that Appellants had any malafide
intention against the Respondent which is clearly
deductible from the MOU dated 20.08.2009 arrived
between the parties.
...            ...            ...            ...
72. The order of the High Court is seriously flawed
due to the fact that in its interim order dated 24.03.2017,
it was observed that the contentions put forth by the
Appellant vis-à-vis two complaints being filed on the
same cause of action at different places but the impugned
order overlooks the said aspect and there was no finding
on that issue. At the same time, in order to attract the
ingredients of Section of 406 and 420
IPC
it is imperative
on the part of the complainant to prima facie establish
that there was an intention on part of the petitioner
38
and/or others to cheat and/or to defraud the
        complainant right from the inception. Furthermore it has
        to be prima facie established that due to such alleged act
        of cheating the complainant (Respondent No. 2 herein)
        had suffered a wrongful loss and the same had resulted
        in wrongful gain for the accused(appellant herein). In
        absence of these elements, no proceeding is permissible
        in the eyes of law with regard to the commission of the
        offence punishable
u/s 420
IPC. It is apparent that the
        complaint was lodged at a very belated stage (as the
        entire transaction took place from January 2008 to
        August 2009, yet the complaint has been filed in March
        2013 i.e., after a delay of almost 4 years) with the
        objective of causing harassment to the petitioner and is
        bereft of any truth whatsoever."
(Emphasis supplied)


The Apex Court in the case of
VIJAY KUMAR GHAI
(supra) after

considering the entire spectrum of law with regard to inter-play

between breach of an agreement and criminal breach of trust or

cheating and holds that breach of an agreement or recovery of

money on such breach of agreement, the criminal law cannot be set

into motion, as it would be giving predominantly civil proceeding, a

colour of crime.
Subsequent to the aforesaid judgment, the Apex

Court in the case of
SARABJIT KAUR V. STATE OF PUNJAB4
has

held as follows:
"8. On the material placed on record by the parties, it is
        evident that an agreement to sell was executed by the appellant
        in favour of the wife of Respondent 2, namely, Sarabjit Kaur for
4
2023 SCC Online SC 210
39
sale of plot measuring 1 (kanal). The agreement to sell
specifically mentions the fact that the appellant/the vendor gets
entitled to the property on the basis of the agreement to sell
executed in her favour by Malkit Kaur on 27-5-2013. The last
date fixed for registration of sale deed was 25-6-2014 which
was extended to 24-12-2014. There is nothing placed on record
by the complainant or the State to show that besides filing of
the criminal complaint, Respondent 2 had initiated any civil
proceedings for execution of sale deed on the basis of
agreement to sell or in the alternative return of the earnest
money.
9. A perusal of the first complaint made by Respondent 2
on 30-9-2015 shows that the prayer was made for return of the
amount paid by him with no allegation of cheating. It was filed
only against Manmohan Singh and Ranjit Singh, the property
dealers. Reference in the aforesaid complaint was made to the
agreement to sell executed between the parties. In addition,
there was a reference to two other agreements to sell executed
in total. A prayer was made for getting an amount of Rs
29,39,500 refunded from the property dealers. Though, in the
aforesaid complaint reference was made to the agreement to
sell in question, however there was no complaint made against
the appellant. The aforesaid complaint was investigated by the
Economic Offences Wing and a report was submitted to the
Senior Superintendent of Police on 22-3-2016. A report was
submitted on the basis of which the legal opinion was sought
from the District Attorney who opined that no criminal offence
was made out and the complainant shall be at liberty to invoke
jurisdiction of the civil court. The aforesaid opinion was accepted
by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Ludhiana (Rural) on 18-
5-2016.
10. Thereafter, Darshan Singh (Respondent 2) made
another complaint to DIG, Ludhiana on 5-10-2016 which again
was enquired into and a finding that earlier identical complaint
was filed as no criminal offence was made out and the second
complaint was consigned to record. In the second complaint,
there was no reference made to the earlier complaint filed by
Darshan Singh.
40
11. Still not satisfied as the result of the earlier complaint
was not to the liking of Respondent 2. He filed another
complaint on 23-1-2017. Thereafter, another complaint was
filed by Respondent 2 on 15-6-2017 on the basis thereof FIR in
question was registered. On the facts of the case in hand, it is
evident that the effort of Respondent 2 was merely to put
pressure on the appellant while involving her in a criminal case
to get his money back whereas there is nothing pleaded that
Respondent 2 that he was ever ready and willing to get the sale
deed registered. There was no effort made by Respondent 2 or
the vendee in the agreement to sell to initiate any civil
proceedings to get the sale deed executed on the basis of the
agreement to sell. In fact, the last date fixed for execution of
the sale deed even after extension was 24-12-2014.
12. There is nothing on record to suggest that any notice
was issued by Respondent 2 or the vendee to the appellant to
get the sale deed registered just either before expiry of the last
date fixed for execution of sale deed or immediately thereafter.
No civil proceedings were also initiated rather Respondent 2
proceeded only by filing complaints with the police two of which
were earlier filed. Had there been any civil proceedings initiated,
the question of readiness and willingness of the vendee is also
an aspect to be examined by the court.
13. A breach of contract does not give rise to criminal
prosecution for cheating unless fraudulent or dishonest intention
is shown right at the beginning of the transaction. Merely on the
allegation of failure to keep up promise will not be enough to
initiate criminal proceedings. From the facts available on record,
it is evident that Respondent 2 had improved his case ever since
the first complaint was filed in which there were no allegations
against the appellant rather it was only against the property
dealers which was in subsequent complaints that the name of
the appellant was mentioned. On the first complaint, the only
request was for return of the amount paid by Respondent 2.
When the offence was made out on the basis of the first
complaint, the second complaint was filed with improved version
making allegations against the appellant as well which was not
there in the earlier complaint. The entire idea seems to be to
convert a civil dispute into criminal and put pressure on the
appellant for return of the amount allegedly paid. The criminal
41
courts are not meant to be used for settling scores or pressurise
      parties to settle civil disputes. Wherever ingredients of criminal
      offences are made out, criminal courts have to take cognizance.
      The complaint in question on the basis of which FIR was
      registered was filed nearly three years after the last date fixed
      for registration of the sale deed. Allowing the proceedings to
      continue would be an abuse of process of the court."
The Apex Court again in the case of
R.NAGENDER YADAV V.

STATE OF TELANGANA5
has held as follows:
"16. At this juncture and more particularly in the peculiar
      facts and circumstances of the case, it will not be proper to
      permit the criminal prosecution to proceed further on the
      allegation of the sale deed being forged. That question will have
      to be decided by the civil court after recording the evidence and
      hearing the parties in accordance with law. It would not be
      proper having regard to what has been highlighted by us to
      permit the complainant to prosecute the appellant on this
      allegation when the validity of the sale deed is being tested
      before the civil court.
17. At this stage, we quote the following relevant part of
      the disputed sale deed dated 29-12-2010:
"AND WHEREAS now the above named Vendor herein has
      offered to sell the abovesaid property to the Vendees for a total
      sale consideration of Rs 24,08,000 (Rupees twenty-four lakhs
      eight thousand only), and the Vendee hereby agreed to
      purchase the same for the said sale consideration, and which is
      more fully described in the schedule and plan annexed hereto
      and marked in red colour and hereinafter for the sake of brevity
      referred to as the "SCHEDULE PROPERTY/SAID PROPERTY"
NOW THIS DEED OF SALE WITNESSETH AS UNDER:
5 (2023)2 SCC 195
42
The Vendor hereby declares, agrees and acknowledges
that he has received the entire sale consideration of Rs
24,08,000 (Rupees twenty-four lakhs eight thousand only), from
the Vendee in the manner mentioned hereunder:
(1) Rs 24,08,000 (Rupees twenty-four lakhs eight
thousand only) financed by Axis Bank Ltd.
And the receipt of which sum the Vendor do hereby admit
and acknowledge."
(emphasis supplied)
18. It appears prima facie from the aforesaid that the
purchaser (Vendee) might have obtained finance from Axis Bank
Ltd. for the purpose of purchasing the plot in question. The
police should have investigated whether the amount of Rs
24,08,000 (Rupees twenty-four lakhs eight thousand only) was
paid by Axis Bank Ltd. directly to the original complainant
(Respondent 2 herein). There is no clarity even in this regard.
This aspect shall also be looked into while deciding the civil suit
between the parties.
19. While exercising its jurisdiction under Section
482CrPC, the High Court has to be conscious that this power is
to be exercised sparingly and only for the purpose of prevention
of abuse of the process of the court or otherwise to secure the
ends of justice. Whether a complaint discloses a criminal offence
or not, depends upon the nature of the act alleged thereunder.
Whether the essential ingredients of a criminal offence are
present or not, has to be judged by the High Court. A complaint
disclosing civil transaction may also have a criminal texture. But
the High Court must see whether the dispute which is in
substance of a civil nature is given a cloak of a criminal offence.
In such a situation, if civil remedy is available and is in fact
adopted, as has happened in the case on hand, the High Court
should have quashed the criminal proceeding to prevent abuse
of process of court.
20. We therefore allow this appeal, set aside the
impugned order [
R. Nagender Yadav v. State of Telangana
,
2021 SCC OnLine TS 3598] of the High Court and quash the
criminal proceedings of Criminal Complaint No. 1029 of 2015.
We clarify that this will not come in the way of instituting
43
appropriate proceedings in future in case the civil court comes
        to the conclusion that the disputed sale deed dated 29-12-2010
        is forged. We refrain ourselves from expressing any opinion as
        regards the genuineness or otherwise of the sale deed in
        question as this question is wide open before the civil court. The
        civil court shall decide the civil suit pending between the parties
        on its own merits and on the basis of the evidence that may be
        led by both the sides. It shall be open to the civil court to take
        the opinion of the handwritings expert as regards the signature
        of the complainant on the disputed sale deed.
21. We clarify that we have passed the aforesaid order in
        the facts and circumstances of the present case and the same
        shall not be cited as a precedent."
A little earlier to the aforesaid judgment, the Apex Court in

the case of
RAMESH CHANDRA GUPTA V. STATE OF U.P.6
has

held as follows:
"15. This Court has an occasion to consider the ambit
        and scope of the power of the High Court under
Section 482
CrPC for quashing of         criminal proceedings in
Vineet
        Kumar v. State of Uttar Pradesh
decided on 31st March, 2017. It
        may be useful to refer to paras 22, 23 and 41 of the above
        judgment where the following was stated:
"22. Before we enter into the facts of the present case it
        is necessary to consider the ambit and scope of jurisdiction
        under
Section 482
CrPC vested in the High Court.
Section 482
CrPC saves the inherent power of the High Court to make such
        orders as may be necessary to give effect to any order under
        this Code, or to prevent abuse of the process of any court or
        otherwise to secure the ends of justice.
23. This Court time and again has examined the scope of
        jurisdiction of the High Court under
Section 482
CrPC and laid
        down several principles which govern the exercise of jurisdiction
        of the High Court under
Section 482
CrPC. A three-Judge Bench
        of this Court in
State of Karnataka v. L. Muniswamy
, (1977) 2
6
(2022) SCC Online SC 1634
44
SCC 699 held that the High Court is entitled to quash a
proceeding if it comes to the conclusion that allowing the
proceeding to continue would be an abuse of the process of the
Court or that the ends of justice require that the proceeding
ought to be quashed. In para 7 of the judgment, the following
has been stated:
'7. ... In the exercise of this wholesome power, the High
Court is entitled to quash a proceeding if it comes to the
conclusion that allowing the proceeding to continue would be an
abuse of the process of the court or that the ends of justice
require that the proceeding ought to be quashed. The saving of
the High Court's inherent powers, both in civil and criminal
matters, is designed to achieve a salutary public purpose which
is that a court proceeding ought not to be permitted to
degenerate into a weapon of harassment or persecution. In a
criminal case, the veiled object behind a lame prosecution, the
very nature of the material on which the structure of the
prosecution rests and the like would justify the High Court in
quashing the proceeding in the interest of justice. The ends of
justice are higher than the ends of mere law though justice has
got to be administered according to laws made by the
legislature. The compelling necessity for making these
observations is that without a proper realisation of the object
and purpose of the provision which seeks to save the inherent
powers of the High Court to do justice, between the State and
its subjects, it would be impossible to appreciate the width and
contours of that salient jurisdiction.'
41. Inherent power given to the High Court under
Section
482
CrPC is with the purpose and object of advancement of
justice. In case solemn process of Court is sought to be abused
by a person with some oblique motive, the Court has to thwart
the attempt at the very threshold. The Court cannot permit a
prosecution to go on if the case falls in one of the categories as
illustratively   enumerated     by   this   Court    in
State   of
Haryana v. Bhajan Lal
, 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335. Judicial process
is a solemn proceeding which cannot be allowed to be converted
into an instrument of operation or harassment.
When there are
materials to indicate that a criminal proceeding is manifestly
attended with mala fides and proceeding is maliciously instituted
with an ulterior motive, the High Court will not hesitate in
exercise of its jurisdiction under
Section 482
CrPC to quash the
proceeding under Category 7 as enumerated in
State of
45
Haryana v. Bhajan Lal
, 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335 which is to the
following effect:
'102.(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly
attended with mala fides and/or where the proceeding is
maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking
vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to
private and personal grudge.'
       Above Category 7 is clearly attracted in the facts of the
present case. Although, the High Court has noted the judgment
of
State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal
, 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335 but
did not advert to the relevant facts of the present case,
materials on which final report was submitted by the IO. We,
thus, are fully satisfied that the present is a fit case where the
High Court ought to have exercised its jurisdiction under
Section
482
CrPC and quashed the criminal proceedings."
16. The exposition of law on the subject relating to the
exercise of the extra-ordinary power under
Article 226
of the
Constitution or the inherent power under
Section 482
CrPC are
well settled and to the possible extent, this Court has defined
sufficiently channelized guidelines, to give an exhaustive list of
myriad kinds of cases wherein such power should be exercised.
This Court has held in para 102 in
State of Haryana v. Bhajan
Lal2
as under:
"102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various
relevant provisions of the Code under Chapter XIV and of the
principles of law enunciated by this Court in a series of decisions
relating to the exercise of the extraordinary power under
Article
226
or the inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code which
we have extracted and reproduced above, we give the following
categories of cases by way of illustration wherein such power
could be exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of any
court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it may
not be possible to lay down any precise, clearly defined and
sufficiently channelised and inflexible guidelines or rigid
formulae and to give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds of cases
wherein such power should be exercised.
(1) Where the allegations made in the first information
report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face
46
value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie
constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first information report
and other materials, if any, accompanying the FIR do not
disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by
police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except under an
order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of the
Code.
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR
or complaint and the evidence collected in support of the same
do not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a
case against the accused.
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a
cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable offence,
no investigation is permitted by a police officer without an order
of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155(2) of the
Code.
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint
are so absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which
no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is
sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused.
(6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any
of the provisions of the Code or the concerned Act (under which
a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and
continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific
provision in the Code or the concerned Act, providing efficacious
redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party.
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended
with mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously
instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the
accused and with a view to spite him due to private and
personal grudge."
17. The principles culled out by this Court have
consistently been followed in the recent judgment of this Court
in
Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Maharashtra3
.
18. The present case is fully covered by categories (1)
and   (3), as enumerated in
State of Haryana v. Bhajan
47
Lal
(supra). A bare perusal of the complaint on the basis of
which FIR came to be registered at the instance of the de-facto
complainant/second respondent does not disclose any act of the
present appellants or their participation in the commission of
crime. They are neither concerned with the registered sale deed
dated 4th May, 1977 nor the later sale deed executed in favour
of the de-facto complainant by Shravan Kumar Gupta dated
22nd December, 2018, nor in possession of the subject property
nor are parties to the civil proceedings and it is not the case of
the complainant that either the appellants have played any
active/passive role either in scribing the document or are
facilitators or witness to the document in reference to which the
complaint has been made for cheating and committing forgery
or have played any role in delivery of possession of the subject
property in question.
19. What it appears is that the de-facto complainant has
implicated the present appellants being members of the family
to put pressure for obtaining possession of the subject property
and to settle the civil dispute which is pending between Vinod
Kumar Gupta, Shravan Kumar Gupta and the de-facto
complainant in Original Suit No. 91 of 2015.
20. We are of the view that in the present facts and
circumstances, the High Court ought to have exercised its power
under
Section 482
CrPC for quashing of the criminal complaint
and proceedings in consequence thereof qua the present
appellants.
21. Before parting with the order, we further like to
observe that the observations which has been made are
restricted to the three appellants, namely, Ramesh Chandra
Gupta, Ashish Gupta and Rinky Sarna before this Court and the
learned trial Judge may not be influenced by the observations
made above and may proceed with the Criminal Case No. 2200
of 2019 qua the other accused persons independently on its own
merits in accordance with law.
48
22. Needless to say that the Court which is seized of the
      Original Suit No. 91 of 2015 may decide the same independently
      on its own merits in accordance with law.
23. In the result, the appeals are allowed. The judgment
      impugned of the High Court dated 3rd February, 2021 is set
      aside and FIR numbered as Criminal Case No. 2200 of 2019
      registered at PS Navabad, District Jhansi and all the
      consequential proceedings qua the present appellants stand
      quashed."
16. On a coalesce of the afore-quoted law elucidated by the

Apex Court what would unmistakably emerge is, that breach of

contract may have several hues and forms.             Every breach of

contract, unless it is shrouded with dishonest intention at the

outset, cannot become an offence under Sections 406 or 420 of the
IPC
. If the facts obtaining in the case at hand are considered on

the bedrock of the elucidation by the Apex Court in the afore-
quoted judgments, what would unmistakably emerge is, the

criminal law that is set in motion on the breach of contract is

unsustainable, more so, in the light of the fact that the complainant

has knocked at the doors of every fora or the remedy for non-
delivery of flats within the stipulated time could be agitated before

any other fora specifically created for the purpose. Criminal law
49
cannot be set into motion on the said delay in delivery of flats, as

those facts arise out of agreements entered into between the

parties, at best, it can be breach of agreement. If it is breach of

agreement, it cannot be cheating or criminal breach of trust.
Therefore, the FIR in Crime No.163 of 2020 is still in the stage of

investigation. I do not find any warrant to permit the investigation

to continue, as there is no investigation conducted in the case at

hand in the light of the interim order granted by this Court.
17. The complainant is at liberty to move any fora, on the

grievance that he is seeking to vent out in terms of the agreement.
The findings or observations made herein will not come in the way

of the complainant knocking at the doors of any other fora, or if he

has already knocked at any other fora, the observations in the

course of the order will not influence or bind such proceedings.
18. In the light of the preceding analysis, the crime in Crime

No.163 of 2020 is rendered unsustainable and its unsustainability

would lead to its obliteration. If it is to be obliterated, whether the

proceedings    instituted   by   the   Enforcement    Directorate    in
50
W.P.No.7855 of 2023 for alleged violation of the
Prevention of

Money Laundering Act
('PMLA' for short), could be permitted to be

continued or not, also requires an answer. It is trite law that the

offence under the PMLA cannot independently stand. It has to be

foundationed on a crime being registered under any penal law. In

the case at hand, the penal law is the registration of the impugned

crime in Crime No.163 of 2020. It is based upon the said crime,

the ECIR was registered and attachments orders have been passed.
The ECIR would not stand as the predicate offence is now held to be

unsustainable.
19. This Court, while disposing the petition between the

parties i.e., the petitioners and the Enforcement Directorate in

W.P.No.20713 of 2022 had observed as follows:
"20. In the result, I pass the following:
ORDER
(i)   The Writ Petition is allowed in part.
(ii)  The Enforcement Directorate is restrained from
     proceeding further in ECIR No.ECIR/BGZO/31/ 2022 registered
     on 11-08-2002, the impugned proceeding, till disposal of Writ
     Petition No.10258 of 2020 and Crime No.163 of 2020.
51
(iii) As a result of the aforesaid order (clause (ii)),
         grant of provisional attachment order dated 11-08-2022 shall be
         kept in abeyance till disposal of Writ Petition No.10258 of 2020
         and Crime No.163 of 2020, which would mean the properties
         subject to attachment cannot be released in favour of the
         petitioners nor can be confirmed or sold by the Enforcement
         Directorate.
(iv) It is made clear that no particular order from the
         Court hearing Writ Petition No.10258 of 2020 and Crime No.163
         of 2020 is required, to continue these proceedings. Once those
         proceedings are permitted to continue, the continuation of
         impugned proceedings then becomes axiomatic."
This Court while disposing the petition had clearly observed that in

the event the interim order in the subject petition would get

vacated, the PMLA proceedings would automatically continue. The

interim order is not getting vacated, but the crime itself is held to

be unsustainable.       If the crime is held to be unsustainable and

results in quashment of the proceedings, what would happen to the

proceedings under the PMLA again need not detain this Court for

long or delve deep into the matter. The Apex Court in the case of
VIJAY MADANLAL CHOUDHARY v. UNION OF INDIA7
has held

as follows:
"CONCLUSION
7
2022 SCC OnLine SC 929
52
467. In light of the above analysis, we now proceed to
summarise our conclusion on seminal points in issue in the
following terms:--
(i)      The question as to whether some of the amendments
         to the
Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002
could not have been enacted by the Parliament by
         way of a
Finance Act
has not been examined in this
         judgment. The same is left open for being examined
         along with or after the decision of the Larger Bench
         (seven Judges) of this Court in the case of Rojer
         Mathew.
(ii)     The expression "proceedings" occurring in Clause
         (na) of
Section 2(1)
of the 2002 Act is contextual
         and is required to be given expansive meaning to
         include inquiry procedure followed by the Authorities
         of ED, the Adjudicating Authority, and the Special
         Court.
(iii)    The expression "investigation" in Clause (na) of
Section 2(1)
of the 2002 Act does not limit itself to
         the matter of investigation concerning the offence
         under the Act and is interchangeable with the
         function of "inquiry" to be undertaken by the
         Authorities under the Act.
(iv)     The Explanation inserted to Clause (u) of
Section
         2(1)
of the 2002 Act does not travel beyond the
         main provision predicating tracking and reaching
         upto the property derived or obtained directly or
         indirectly as a result of criminal activity relating to a
         scheduled offence.
(v)(a)
Section 3
of the 2002 Act has a wider reach and
         captures every process and activity, direct or
         indirect, in dealing with the proceeds of crime and is
         not limited to the happening of the final act of
         integration of tainted property in the formal
         economy. The Explanation inserted to
Section 3
by
         way of amendment of 2019 does not expand the
         purport of
Section 3
but is only clarificatory in
         nature. It clarifies the word "and" preceding the
53
expression projecting or claiming as "or"; and being
       a clarificatory amendment, it would make no
       difference even if it is introduced by way of
Finance
       Act
or otherwise.
(b)    Independent of the above, we are clearly of the view
       that the expression "and" occurring in
Section 3
has
       to be construed as "or", to give full play to the said
       provision so as to include "every" process or activity
       indulged into by anyone. Projecting or claiming the
       property as untainted property would constitute an
       offence of money-laundering on its own, being an
       independent process or activity.
(c)    The interpretation suggested by the petitioners, that
       only upon projecting or claiming the property in
       question as untainted property that the offence of
Section 3
would be complete, stands rejected.
(d)    The offence under
Section 3
of the 2002 Act is
       dependent on illegal gain of property as a
       result of criminal activity relating to a
       scheduled offence. It is concerning the process
       or activity connected with such property, which
       constitutes the offence of money-laundering.
The Authorities under the 2002 Act cannot
       prosecute any person on notional basis or on
       the assumption that a scheduled offence has
       been committed, unless it is so registered with
       the   jurisdictional police and/or pending
       enquiry/trial including by way of criminal
       complaint before the competent forum. If the
       person is finally discharged/acquitted of the
       scheduled offence or the criminal case against
       him is quashed by the Court of competent
       jurisdiction, there can be no offence of money-
       laundering against him or any one claiming
       such property being the property linked to
       stated scheduled offence through him.
(vi)
Section 5
of the 2002 Act is constitutionally
       valid. It provides for a balancing arrangement
       to secure the interests of the person as also
54
ensures that the proceeds of crime remain
         available to be dealt with in the manner
         provided by the 2002 Act. The procedural
         safeguards as delineated by us hereinabove are
         effective measures to protect the interests of
         person concerned.
(vii)    The challenge to the validity of sub-section (4) of
Section 8
of the 2002 Act is also rejected subject to
Section 8
being invoked and operated in accordance
         with the meaning assigned to it hereinabove.
(viii)   The challenge to deletion of proviso to sub-section
         (1) of
Section 17
of the 2002 Act stands rejected.
         There are stringent safeguards provided in
Section
         17
and Rules framed thereunder. Moreover, the pre-
         condition in the proviso to Rule 3(2) of the 2005
         Rules cannot be read into
Section 17
after its
         amendment. The Central Government may take
         necessary corrective steps to obviate confusion
         caused in that regard.
(ix)     The challenge to deletion of proviso to sub-section
         (1) of
Section 18
of the 2002 Act also stands
         rejected. There are similar safeguards provided in
Section 18
. We hold that the amended provision
         does not suffer from the vice of arbitrariness.
(x)      The challenge to the constitutional validity of
Section
         19
of the 2002 Act is also rejected. There are
         stringent safeguards provided in
Section 19
. The
         provision does not suffer from the vice of
         arbitrariness.
(xi)     Section 24 of the 2002 Act has reasonable nexus
         with the purposes and objects sought to be achieved
         by the 2002 Act and cannot be regarded as
         manifestly arbitrary or unconstitutional.
(xii)(a) The proviso in Clause (a) of sub-section (1) of
Section 44
of the 2002 Act is to be regarded as
          directory in nature and this provision is also read
55
down to mean that the Special Court may exercise
         judicial discretion on case-to-case basis.
(b)      We do not find merit in the challenge to
Section 44
being arbitrary or unconstitutional. However, the
         eventualities referred to in this section shall be dealt
         with by the Court concerned and by the Authority
         concerned in accordance with the interpretation
         given in this judgment.
(xiii)(a) The reasons which weighed with this Court in Nikesh
          Tarachand Shah for declaring the twin conditions in
Section 45(1)
of the 2002 Act, as it stood at the
          relevant time, as unconstitutional in no way
          obliterated the provision from the statute book; and
          it was open to the Parliament to cure the defect
          noted by this Court so as to revive the same
          provision in the existing form.
(b)      We are unable to agree with the observations
         in Nikesh    Tarachand     Shah distinguishing    the
         enunciation of the Constitution Bench decision
         in Kartar Singh; and other observations suggestive
         of doubting the perception of Parliament in regard to
         the seriousness of the offence of money-laundering,
         including about it posing serious threat to the
         sovereignty and integrity of the country.
(c)      The provision in the form of
Section 45
of the 2002
         Act, as applicable post amendment of 2018, is
         reasonable and has direct nexus with the purposes
         and objects sought to be achieved by the 2002 Act
         and does not suffer from the vice of arbitrariness or
         unreasonableness.
(d)      As regards the prayer for grant of bail, irrespective
         of the nature of proceedings, including those under
         Section 438 of the 1973 Code or even upon invoking
         the jurisdiction of Constitutional Courts, the
         underlying principles and rigours of
Section 45
may
         apply.
56
(xiv)    The beneficial provision of Section 436A of the 1973
         Code could be invoked by the accused arrested for
         offence punishable under the 2002 Act.
(xv)(a) The process envisaged by
Section 50
of the 2002 Act
         is in the nature of an inquiry against the proceeds of
         crime and is not "investigation" in strict sense of the
         term for initiating prosecution; and the Authorities
         under the 2002 Act (referred to in
Section 48
), are
         not police officers as such.
(b)      The statements recorded by the Authorities under
         the 2002 Act are not hit by
Article 20(3)
or
Article 21
of the Constitution of India.
(xvi)
Section 63
of the 2002 Act providing for punishment
         regarding false information or failure to give
         information does not suffer from any vice of
         arbitrariness.
(xvii) The inclusion or exclusion of any particular offence in
        the Schedule to the 2002 Act is a matter of
        legislative policy; and the nature or class of any
        predicate offence has no bearing on the validity of
        the Schedule or any prescription thereunder.
(xviii)(a) In view of special mechanism envisaged by the
         2002 Act, ECIR cannot be equated with an FIR under
         the 1973 Code. ECIR is an internal document of the
         ED and the fact that FIR in respect of scheduled
         offence has not been recorded does not come in the
         way of the Authorities referred to in
Section 48
to
         commence inquiry/investigation for initiating "civil
         action" of "provisional attachment" of property being
         proceeds of crime.
(b)      Supply of a copy of ECIR in every case to the person
         concerned is not mandatory, it is enough if ED at the
         time of arrest, discloses the grounds of such arrest.
(c)      However, when the arrested person is produced
         before the Special Court, it is open to the Special
         Court to look into the relevant records presented by
57
the authorised representative of ED for answering
               the issue of need for his/her continued detention in
               connection with the offence of money-laundering.
(xix)   Even when ED manual is not to be published being
               an internal departmental document issued for the
               guidance of the Authorities (ED officials), the
               department ought to explore the desirability of
               placing information on its website which may broadly
               outline the scope of the authority of the functionaries
               under the Act and measures to be adopted by them
               as also the options/remedies available to the person
               concerned before the Authority and before the
               Special Court.
(xx)    The petitioners are justified in expressing serious
               concern bordering on causing injustice owing to the
               vacancies in the Appellate Tribunal. We deem it
               necessary to impress upon the executive to take
               corrective measures in this regard expeditiously.
(xxi)   The argument about proportionality of punishment
               with reference to the nature of scheduled offence is
               wholly unfounded and stands rejected."
(Emphasis supplied)


Clause (d) of the aforesaid conclusion the Apex Court considers
Section 3
of the Act and later upholds the constitutional validity of
Section 5
of the Act in terms of clause (vi) supra.
Section 5
of the

Act is what deals with the attachment of the properties. Clause
(v)(d) of paragraph 467 (supra) establishes the link between the

two.   The Apex Court holds that in the event the accused in the

PMLA or whose allegations are linked to any persons in the
58
predicate offence such accused in the predicate offence gets a clean

chit on three circumstances - one by acquittal after a full blown

trial; two on discharge by the competent Court and three on the

proceedings being quashed by the High Court in exercise of its

jurisdiction under
Section 482
of the Cr.P.C. In all these cases,

there can be no offence of money laundering against the accused.
The predicate offence in the case at hand is, Crime No.163 of 2020.
Crime No.163 of 2020 is held to be unsustainable. If crime No.163

of 2020 is the foundation, and the proceedings under the PMLA are

the super structure, the foundation having been obliterated, the

super structure would tumble down, so to say, that the proceedings

under the PMLA will vanish owing to its sustenance only on the

predicate offence.
20. In the light of the judgment of the Apex Court in the case

of VIJAY MADANLAL CHOUDHARY, the obliteration of the

proceedings under the PMLA becomes axiomatic the moment the

predicate offence gets obliterated.
59
21. For the aforesaid reasons, the following:
ORDER
(i)    Writ Petition No.10258 of 2020 and Writ Petition

               No.7855 of 2023 are allowed.
(ii)   The impugned proceedings in Crime No.163 of 2020

               and Spl.C.C.No.2874 of 2022 stands quashed.
Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed as a

consequence.
Sd/-
JUDGE




bkp
CT:SS