SOURCE: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/2926549/
SCRAPED: 2026-02-18T10:26:21.141031
TITLE: Full Document
================================================================================

[Cites
10
, Cited by
4
]
Madras High Court
G.Logeswaran vs State Represented By on 6 December, 2018
Author:
N.Anand Venkatesh
Bench:
N.Anand Venkatesh
1


                                    IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS

                                                    DATED : 06.12.2018

                                                           CORAM

                                   THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE N.ANAND VENKATESH

                                                Crl.O.P.No.7405 of 2017 and
                                              Crl.M.P.Nos.5328 & 5329 of 2017

                      G.Logeswaran                                           ... Petitioner

                                                           Versus

                      1.State represented by,
                        Inspector of Police,
                        All Women Police Station,
                        Vellore.

                      2.D.Bindhu                                             ... Respondents



                      PRAYER: Criminal Original Petition is filed under
Section 482
of the Code of

                      Criminal Procedure, to call for the records in C.C.No.174 of 2010, on the

                      file of Judicial Magistrate, Katpadi and quash the proceedings.

                                     For Petitioner    :   Mr.Karthick, Senior Counsel for
                                                           Mr.T.S.Gopalan

                                     For R2            :   Mr.M.Mohamed Riyaz
                                                           Additional Public Prosecutor for
                                                           Mr.S.Sathia Chandran

                                                           ******



http://www.judis.nic.in
                                                            2


                                                       ORDER
This petition has been filed seeking to quash the proceedings in

                      C.C.No.174 of 2010, pending on the file of the Judicial Magistrate, Katpadi.
2.Based on the complaint given by the defacto-complainant, an F.I.R

                      came to be registered by the respondent Police for the offence under

                      Section 292(a) and
Section 506(i)
of I.P.C and
Section 4
of the Tamil Nadu

                      Prohibition of Harassment of Women Act, 1998.        The respondent Police

                      investigated the case and final report came to be filed before the Court

                      below and the same was taken cognizance for the offence under
Section

                      4
of the Tamil Nadu Prohibition of Harassment of Women Act, 1998 and
Section 506(i)
of I.P.C. The charges were also framed by the Court below

                      and the same has been put to challenge in this Criminal Original Petition.
3.The case of the prosecution is that the defacto-complainant had

                      dispute with her husband Balaji and there was a Civil Suit pending between

                      them. The 2nd respondent also gave an complaint against the said Balaji for

                      an offence under SC/ST Act and the same was pending in Special S.C.No.1

                      of 2009 before the learned Principal District and Sessions Judge, Vellore.

                      The petitioner was a practising advocate in Vellore and he came in contact

http://www.judis.nic.in
3
with the 2nd respondent and offered to help her in the pending cases. It is

                      the further case of the prosecution is that the petitioner started putting

                      pressure on the 2nd respondent to marry him and was sending threatening

                      messages to her cellphone. It is also the further case of the prosecution

                      that certain vulgar messages were also sent to the 2nd respondent by the

                      petitioner.
4.The learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner would submit that a

                      reading of the entire allegations made in the final report, even if it is taken

                      as it is, will not constitute an offence under
Section 4
of the Tamil Nadu

                      Prohibition of Harassment of Women Act, 1998. In order to substantiate his

                      arguments, the learned       Senior Counsel relied upon         the following

                      Judgments:-
(1) I.Linga Bhaskar and others Versus The State through the
                            Inspector of Police, Thoothukudi South Police Station,
                            Thoothukudi and another, dated 05.06.2018, reported in
                            2018-2-L.W (Crl.) 309.
(2) 1.Gouresh Mehra, 2.Susil Mehra Versus 1.The State rep.
by the Sub Inspector of Police, Cyber Crime Cell, CCB
                            Egmore, Chennai 2.Rajesh Arora, dated 25.10.2010.



http://www.judis.nic.in
4
(3) 1.M.Arunachalam 2.Deepa Versus The Inspector of
                            Police, B-5 Police Station, Singanallore, Coimbatore, dated
                            20.09.2018.
5.Therefore, the learned Senior Counsel would submit that the

                      proceedings pending before the Court below is an abuse of process of Court

                      and the same requires interference by this Court under Section 482 of

                      Cr.P.C.
6.The learned counsel appearing for the defacto-complainant would

                      submit that the petitioner was continuously sending messages to the

                      defacto-complainant's mobile phone to marry him and also was sending

                      Vulgar messages to the defacto-complainant. The learned counsel would

                      submit that
Section 3
of the Tamil Nadu Prohibition of Harassment of

                      Women Act has to be read along with the
Section 4
of the Tamil Nadu

                      Prohibition of Harassment of Women Act and therefore even if the messages

                      were sent to her mobile phone, the same will constitute an offence under
Section 4
of the Tamil Nadu Prohibition of Harassment of Women Act.
7.In this case, eventhough the final report was filed for an alleged

                      offence under
Section 506(i)
I.P.C and
Section 4
of the Tamil Nadu

                      Prohibition of Harassment of Women Act, the charges came to be framed
http://www.judis.nic.in
5
against the petitioner only for an offence under
Section 4
of the Tamil Nadu

                      Prohibition of Harassment of Women Act. Therefore, this Court has to see

                      as to whether on the basis of the allegations made in the final report, an

                      offence under
Section 4
of the Tamil Nadu Prohibition of Harassment of

                      Women Act has been made out. In order to substantiate his arguments, the

                      learned counsel for the defacto-complainant relied upon the Judgment of

                      this Court in Basheer Ahamed and Others Versus State, Rep. by the

                      Inspector of Police, W13, All Women Police Station, Washermenpet

                      Circle, Chennai-21 reported in 2006(4) CTC 374.
8.For this purpose, it will be relevant to rely upon the Judgment

                      cited by the learned Senior Counsel representing the petitioner. The first

                      Judgment relied upon is Gouresh Mehra and others Versus The State rep.

                      by the Sub Inspector of Police, Cyber Crime Cell, CCB Egmore, Chennai

                      and others, dated 25.10.2010. The relevant portion of the Judgment is

                      extracted here under:-
''5. At the outset, it is to be informed that the
Tamil Nadu Prohibition of Harassment of Women Act
would not be applicable in the present case.
The Act
defines harassment as follows :
http://www.judis.nic.in
6
' "harassment means any indecent conduct or act by a
                          man which causes or is likely to cause intimidation,
                          fear, shame or embarrassment, including abusing or
                          causing hurt or nuisance or assault or use of force.
                          Thus, the offending e-mails would amount to acts of
                          harassment within the definition of the word in the
                          Act. The definition is gender specific. Harassment
                          under the act only can be committed by a man. But, it
                          is noticed that the harassment suffered in the case is
                          within the confines of the home/place, wherein a
                          computer is housed. The accusation against the
                          petitioners is
u/s. 4
of the Tamil Nadu Prohibition of
                          Harassment of Women Act, 1998.
Section 4
reads as
                          follows:
'4. Penalty for harassment of woman. -- Whoever
                          commits or participates in or abets harassment of
                          woman in or within the precincts of any educational
                          institution, temple or other place of worship, bus
                          stop, road, railway station, cinema theatre, park,
                          beach, place of festival, public service vehicle or
                          vessel or any other place shall be punished with
                          imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
                          years and with fine which shall not be less than ten
                          thousand rupees.' [emphasis supplied].
6. This court is of the considered opinion that
                          the words 'any other place' found in
Section 4
are to be
                          read 'ejusdem generis'. The Tamil Nadu Prohibition of
http://www.judis.nic.in
7
Harassment of Women Act, 1998 when originally
                          enacted consisted of 10 sections and came into force
                          on 30.07.1998. The offences
u/s.4-A
Harassment
                          death, 4-B Harassment suicide and 4-C Presumption as
                          to harassment death and abetment of harassment
                          suicide   have    been   included     under    subsequent
                          amendments of the year 2002. Confining ourselves to
                          the offence contemplated
u/s. 4
and looking into the
                          objects and reasons of the enactment not towards
                          informing ourselves of the amplitude of the Act but
                          towards understanding the idea behind it, we find that
                          the enactment was intended as a measure to eradicate
                          eve teasing in public places.
The Act
informs what
                          would constitute harassment in general terms in
Section   3
and     while prescribing     a penalty for
                          harassment under
section 4
restricts the same to
                          harassment       committed       at   particular   places.
Proceeding further, we find that
u/s. 5
&
6
,
                          responsibilities are cast upon persons in-charge of
                          educational institutions, temple or other places of
                          worship, cinema theatre or any other precinct and
                          upon the crew of a public service vehicle or vessel.
                          This Court considers it reasonable to hold that
Section
                          4
of the Act was meant to deal with offences occurring
                          in the places informed or in places of like nature. If
                          not so read, the mention of the particular places in
section 4
would be rendered redundant and such could
                          not have been the legislative intent. To put it
http://www.judis.nic.in
8
differently, if the intent was to attract punishment
                               for harassment at any and every place,
section 4
simply could have read as follows :
'4. Penalty for harassment of woman. -- Whoever
                               commits or participates in or abets harassment of
                               woman in any place shall be punished ...........
9.The Second Judgment relied upon is Linga Bhaskar and others

                      Versus The State through the Inspector of Police, Thoothukudi South

                      Police Station, Thoothukudi and another, dated 05.06.2018 reported in

                      2018-2-L.W. (Crl.)309. The relevant portion of the Judgment is extracted

                      here under:-
9.
Section 4
of the Tamil Nadu Prohibition of
                             Harassment of Women Act, reads as follows:
"
Section 4
: Penalty for harassment of woman: Whoever
                             commits or participates in or abets harassment of woman
                             in or within the precincts of any educational institution,
                             temple or other place of worship, bus stop, road, railway
                             station, cinema theatre, park, beach, place of festival,
                             public service vehicle or vessel or any other place shall be
                             punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend
                             to three years and with fine which shall not be less than
                             ten thousand rupees."
10.First of all, there should be harassment and such
                             harassment should be within the places which are
http://www.judis.nic.in
9
indicated in
Section 4
of the Act. Harassment of women is
                             defined under
Section 2(a)
of the Act. Harassment means
                             any indecent act or by a man which causes or is likely to
                             cause     intimidation,    fear,     shame     or    embarrassment,
                             including abusing or causing hurt or nuisance or assault or
                             use of force.
The Act
is intended to punish person who
                             does something in order to outrage women's modesty. In
                             several    decisions      of   the       Hon'ble    Supreme    Court,
                             harassment of women has been dealt with. The allegation
                             is about the posting of an emoji in a whatsapp group
                             shared by the group of persons. The posting of emoji is to
                             express ones feeling. It is an act that may offend the
                             second respondent but that is not an act attracting
Section
                             4
of the Tamil Nadu Prohibition of Harassment of Women
                             Act, 1998.
10.The learned counsel for the 2nd respondent has relied upon the

                      Judgment of this Court in Basheer Ahamed and Others Versus State, Rep.

                      by   the    Inspector   of    Police,     W13,      All    Women     Police    Station,

                      Washermenpet Circle, Chennai-21 reported in 2006(4) CTC 374.                       The

                      relevant portion of the Judgment is extracted here under:-
7.Learned counsel for the petitioner referring to
                                 the phrase “or any other place” found in
Section 4
of
                                 the Act, would submit that the said phrase will have to
                                 be read in consonance with the places mentioned in the

http://www.judis.nic.in
10
foregoing phrases in the Section. He also referred to
                          the Judgment in State of Karnataka V.Kempaiah, 1998
                          Crl.L.J. 4070, wherein it has been held that the phrase
                          “or in any other manner” found in the definition of
Section 2(1)
of Karnataka Lokayukta Act (1984) should
                          be read to mean the same kind of things as thus
                          specified in the very sane Section.
8.But in this case, it is found that
Section 3
of
                          the Tamil Nadu Prohibition of Harassment of Women
                          Act, 1998 specifically prohibits the harassment of
                          women at any place.      The Preamble would also read
                          that the harassment of women in any place in the State
                          of Tamil Nadu is prohibited. When there is no specific
                          punishment contemplated for the violation of
Section 3
of the Tamil Nadu Prohibition of Harassment of Women
                          Act, 1998, the said Section will have to be read along
                          with the
Section 4
of the said Act which is the
                          compendious Penal Provision.      A conjoint reading of
Section 3
and
4
of the said Act would give the meaning
                          that “at any place” means wherever the occurrence had
                          taken place.      If separate    punishment   has been
                          contemplated for the offence under
Section 3
of the
                          said At, then as rightly pointed out by the learned
                          counsel for the petitioner, “or any other place” found
                          in
Section 4
of would mean one of the places as
                          adumbrated therein.     But here, if we read conjointly
                          both the aforesaid Sections, it will cover the occurrence
http://www.judis.nic.in
11
wherever it takes place.
11.Eventhough
Section 3
of the Tamil Nadu Prohibition of Harassment

                      of Women Act states that harassment of Women at any place is prohibited,

                      while providing the penalty for harassment of women, it is specifically

                      restricted to particular places where the harassment has to take place. If
Section 4
of the Tamil Nadu Prohibition of Harassment of Women Act is to

                      be read in the manner indicated by the learned counsel for the 2 nd

                      respondent, there was no need for defining the place, in the said provision

                      and the provision itself would have said “Any Place”. The whole purport of

                      the Act is that the harassment should not happen in a public place. This

                      Court is therefore in complete agreement with the submissions made by the

                      learned Senior counsel in this regard.
12.The alleged incident has taken place in the year 2009 and the

                      final report was filed in the year 2010. The proceedings have been pending

                      for the last eight years without any progress. Going by the allegations made

                      in the final report, no useful purpose will be served by keeping the

                      proceedings pending.
http://www.judis.nic.in
12
13.The Judgements that have been cited by the learned Senior

                      Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner will squarely cover the facts

                      of this case. Admittedly in this case the requirements of
Section 4
of the

                      Tamil Nadu Prohibition of Harassment of Women Act have not been

                      fulfilled.   A message sent through a mobile phone will not attract the

                      requirements of
Section 4
of the Tamil Nadu Prohibition of Harassment of

                      Women Act, 1998.
14.In view of the above, the proceedings in C.C.No.174 of 2010, on

                      the file of the Judicial Magistrate, Katpadi is hereby quashed. Accordingly,

                      this Criminal Original Petition is Allowed.   Consequently, the connected

                      Miscellaneous Petitions are closed.
06.12.2018
                      Index: Yes/No
                      Internet: Yes/No

                      vv2

                      To
1.The Judicial Magistrate Court,
                         Katpadi.
2.The Inspector of Police,
                        All Women Police Station,
                        Vellore.
3.The Public Prosecutor,
http://www.judis.nic.in
13
High Court, Madras.
N.ANAND VENKATESH.J.,

                                                                         vv2
Crl.O.P.No.7405 of 2017
06.12.2018


http://www.judis.nic.in
14
http://www.judis.nic.in