SOURCE: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/100472805/
SCRAPED: 2026-02-18T10:26:55.528399
TITLE: Full Document
================================================================================

[Cites
62
, Cited by
22
]
Delhi High Court
Naz Foundation vs Government Of Nct Of Delhi And Others on 2 July, 2009
Equivalent citations: 2010 CRI. L. J. 94, 2009 (6) SCC 712, 2009 (4) AIR BOM R 58, (2009) 3 RECCRIR 523, (2009) 3 DLT(CRL) 40, (2009) 160 DLT 277, (2009) 44 OCR 51, (2009) 3 ALLCRIR 2897, (2009) 6 SCALE 627, (2009) 2 BOMCR(CRI) 257, (2009) 4 MH LJ (CRI) 490, (2010) 1 CHANDCRIC 330, (2009) 2 CRIMES 294, 2010 (2) AKAR (NOC) 149 (DEL.)
Author:
Ajit Prakash Shah
Bench:
Chief Justice
,
S.Muralidhar
*    IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
    +                     WP(C) No.7455/2001
    %                     Date of decision : 2nd July, 2009


    Naz Foundation                            .... Petitioner
               Through:    Mr.Anand Grover, Sr.Advocate with
                           Mr.Trideep Pais, Ms.Shivangi Rai and
                           Ms.Mehak Sothi and Ms.Tripti
                           Tandon, Advocates
                      versus
    Government of NCT of Delhi
    and Others                                .... Respondents
               Through : Mr.P.P. Malhotra, ASG with
                          Mr.Chetan Chawla, Advocate for
                          UOI.
                          Ms.Mukta Gupta, Standing Counsel
                          (Crl.) with Mr.Gaurav Sharma and
                          Mr.Shankar Chhabra, Advocates for
                          GNCT of Delhi.
                           Mr.Ravi Shankar Kumar with
                           Mr.Ashutosh Dubey, Advocates for
                           respondent No.6/Joint Action Council
                           Kannur.
                           Mr.H.P.Sharma, Advocate for
                           respondent No.7/Mr.B.P. Singhal.
                           Mr.S.Divan, Sr. Advocate with
                           Mr.V.Khandelwal, Mr.Arvind Narain,
                           Ms.S. Nandini, Mr.Mayur Suresh,
                           Ms.Vrinda Grover and Mr.Jawahar
                           Raja, Advocates for respondent
                           No.8-Voices against 377.
    CORAM:
    HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
    HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE S.MURALIDHAR

    1.Whether reporters of the local news papers
       be allowed to see the judgment? Y
    2.To be referred to the Reporter or not ? Y
    3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?Y




[WP(C)7455/2001]                               Page 1 of 105
      AJIT PRAKASH SHAH, CHIEF JUSTICE:

1.   This writ petition has been preferred by Naz Foundation, a

     Non Governmental Organisation (NGO) as a Public Interest

     Litigation to challenge the constitutional validity of
Section

     377
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (
IPC
), which criminally

     penalizes what is described as "unnatural offences", to the

     extent the said provision criminalises consensual sexual

     acts between adults in private. The challenge is founded on

     the plea that
Section 377
IPC, on account of it covering

     sexual acts between consenting adults in private infringes

     the fundamental rights guaranteed under
Articles 14
, 15
, 19
& 21
of the Constitution of India.   Limiting their plea, the

     petitioners submit that
Section 377
IPC should apply only to

     non-consensual penile non-vaginal sex and penile non-

     vaginal   sex involving minors. The Union of India is

     impleaded as respondent No.5 through Ministry of Home

     Affairs and Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. Respondent

     No.4 is the National Aids Control Organisation (hereinafter

     referred to as "NACO") a body formed under the aegis of

     Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Government of India.

     NACO is    charged with formulating       and   implementing

     policies for the prevention of HIV/AIDS in India. Respondent

     No.3 is the Delhi State Aids Control Society.    Respondent

     No.2 is the Commissioner of Police, Delhi. Respondents No.6

     to 8 are individuals and NGOs, who were permitted to

     intervene on their request. The writ petition was dismissed

[WP(C)7455/2001]                                Page 2 of 105
      by this Court in 2004 on the ground that there is no cause of

     action in favour of the petitioner and that such a petition

     cannot be entertained to examine the academic challenge

     to the constitutionality of the legislation.       The Supreme

     Court     vide   order   dated   03.02.2006   in   Civil   Appeal

     No.952/2006 set aside the said order of this Court observing

     that the matter does require consideration and is not of a

     nature which could have been dismissed on the aforesaid

     ground.     The matter was remitted to this Court for fresh

     decision.



     HISTORY OF THE LEGISLATION


2.   At the core of the controversy involved here is the penal

     provision
Section 377
IPC which criminalizes sex other than

     heterosexual penile-vaginal. The legislative history of the

     subject indicates that the first records of sodomy as a crime

     at Common Law in England were chronicled in the Fleta,

     1290, and later in the Britton, 1300. Both texts prescribed

     that sodomites should be burnt alive. Acts of sodomy later

     became penalized by hanging under the Buggery Act of

     1533 which was re-enacted in 1563 by Queen Elizabeth I,

     after which it became the charter for the subsequent

     criminalisation of sodomy in the British Colonies. Oral-

     genital sexual acts were later removed from the definition

     of buggery in 1817. And in 1861, the death penalty for

     buggery was formally abolished in England and Wales.

[WP(C)7455/2001]                                   Page 3 of 105
      However, sodomy or buggery remained as a crime "not to

     be mentioned by Christians."


3.
Indian Penal Code
was drafted by Lord Macaulay and

     introduced in 1861 in British India.
Section 377
IPC is

     contained in Chapter XVI of the
IPC
titled "Of Offences

     Affecting the Human Body".       Within this Chapter
Section

     377
IPC is categorised under the sub-chapter titled "Of

     Unnatural Offences" and reads as follows:


       "377. Unnatural Offences - Whoever voluntarily has
       carnal intercourse against the order of nature with
       any man, woman or animal, shall be punished with
       imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either
       description for a term which may extend to ten
       years, and shall also be liable to fine.

       Explanation - Penetration is sufficient to constitute
       the carnal intercourse necessary to the offence
       described in this section."

     JUDICIAL INTERPRETATION


4.   The marginal note refers to the acts proscribed as

     "unnatural offences". This expression, however, is not used

     in the text of
Section 377
IPC.       The expression "carnal

     intercourse" is used in
Section 377
IPC as distinct from the

     expression "sexual intercourse", which appears in
Sections

     375
and
497
IPC.         According to the Concise Oxford

     Dictionary (ninth edition, 1995), the term "carnal" means

     "of the body or flesh; worldly" and "sensual, sexual".

     Consent is no defence to an offence under
Section 377
IPC

[WP(C)7455/2001]                                   Page 4 of 105
     and no distinction regarding age is made in the section. In

    Khanu v. Emperor, AIR 1925 Sind 286, Kennedy A.J.C. held

    that "
section 377
IPC punishes certain persons who have

    carnal intercourse against the order of nature with inter alia

    human beings.... [if the oral sex committed in this case is

    carnal intercourse], it is clearly against the order of nature,

    because the natural object of carnal intercourse is that

    there should be the possibility of conception of human

    beings,   which     in   the     case    of   coitus   per   os   is

    impossible."[page 286] It appears that the courts had

    earlier held in R. V. Jacobs (1817) Russ & Ry 331 C.C.R.,

    and Govindarajula In re., (1886) 1 Weir 382, that inserting

    the penis in the mouth would not amount to an offence

    under
Section 377
IPC.         Later,
Section 377
IPC has been

    interpreted to cover oral sex, anal sex and penetration of

    other orifices. In Lohana Vasantlal Devchand v. State,

    AIR 1968 Guj 252, the issue was whether oral sex amounted

    to an offence under
Section 377
IPC. It was held that the

    "orifice of the mouth is not, according to nature, meant for

    sexual or carnal intercourse." In Calvin Francis v. Orissa,

    1992 (2) Crimes 455, relying on Lohana, it was held that

    oral sex fell within the ambit of
Section 377
IPC. The Court

    used the references to the Corpus Juris Secundum relating

    to sexual perversity and abnormal sexual satisfaction as the

    guiding criteria.   In Fazal Rab Choudhary v. State of

    Bihar, AIR 1983 SC 323, it was observed that
Section 377
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                    Page 5 of 105
IPC
implied "sexual perversity". It is evident that the tests

     for attracting the penal provisions have changed from the

     non-procreative to imitative to sexual perversity.


5.   The English law was reformed in Britain by the Sexual

     Offences Act, 1967, which de-criminalised homosexuality

     and acts of sodomy between consenting adults (above age

     of 21) pursuant to the report of Wolfenden Committee. The

     Committee advising the Parliament had recommended in

     1957 repeal of laws punishing homosexual conduct.


     THE CHALLENGE


6.   The petitioner NGO has been working in the field of HIV/AIDS

     Intervention   and   prevention.     This   necessarily    involves

     interaction with such sections of society as are vulnerable to

     contracting HIV/AIDS and which include gay community or

     individuals described as "men who have sex with men"

     (MSM). For sake of convenient reference, they would

     hereinafter be referred to as "homosexuals" or "gay"

     persons or gay community. Homosexuals, according to the

     petitioner, represent a population segment that is extremely

     vulnerable to HIV/AIDS infection.      The petitioner claims to

     have been impelled to bring this litigation in public interest

     on the ground that HIV/AIDS prevention efforts were found

     to   be   severely   impaired   by     discriminatory      attitudes

     exhibited by state agencies towards gay community, MSM

     or   trans-gendered    individuals,     under     the     cover   of


[WP(C)7455/2001]                                     Page 6 of 105
      enforcement of
Section 377
IPC, as a result of which basic

     fundamental human rights of such individuals/groups (in

     minority) stood denied and they were subjected to abuse,

     harassment, assault from public and public authorities.


7.   According to the petitioner,
Section 377
IPC is based upon

     traditional Judeo-Christian moral and ethical standards,

     which conceive of sex in purely functional terms, i.e., for the

     purpose of procreation only.       Any non-procreative sexual

     activity is thus viewed as being "against the order of

     nature". The submission is that the legislation criminalising

     consensual oral and anal sex is outdated and has no place in

     modern society. In fact, studies of
Section 377
IPC

     jurisprudence reveal that lately it has generally been

     employed in cases of child sexual assault and abuse.            By

     criminalising private, consensual same-sex conduct,
Section

     377
IPC serves as the weapon for police abuse; detaining

     and   questioning,    extortion,     harassment,    forced     sex,

     payment of hush money; and perpetuates negative and

     discriminatory   beliefs   towards    same-sex     relations   and

     sexuality minorities; which consequently drive the activities

     of gay men and MSM, as well as sexuality minorities

     underground thereby crippling HIV/AIDS prevention efforts.
Section 377
IPC thus creates a class of vulnerable people

     that is continually victimised and directly affected by the

     provision.    It has been submitted that the fields of

     psychiatry and psychology no longer treat homosexuality as

[WP(C)7455/2001]                                  Page 7 of 105
      a disease and regard sexual orientation to be a deeply held,

     core part of the identities of individuals.


8.   The petitioner submits that while right to privacy is implicit

     in the right to life and liberty and guaranteed to the citizens,

     in order to be meaningful, the pursuit of happiness

     encompassed within the concepts of privacy, human dignity,

     individual autonomy and the human need for an intimate

     personal sphere require that privacy - dignity claim

     concerning private, consensual, sexual relations are also

     afforded protection within the ambit of the said fundamental

     right to life and liberty given under
Article 21.
It is averred

     that no aspect of one's life may be said to be more private

     or intimate than that of sexual relations, and since private,

     consensual, sexual relations or sexual preferences figure

     prominently within an individual's personality and lie easily

     at the core of the "private space", they are an inalienable

     component of the right of life.         Based on this line of

     reasoning, a case has been made to the effect that the

     prohibition of certain private, consensual sexual relations

     (homosexual) provided by
Section 377
IPC unreasonably

     abridges the right of privacy and dignity within the ambit of

     right to life and liberty under
Article 21.
The petitioner

     argues that fundamental right to privacy under
Article 21
can be abridged only for a compelling state interest which,

     in its submission, is amiss here.             Also based on the

     fundamental right to life under
Article 21
is the further

[WP(C)7455/2001]                                     Page 8 of 105
      submission that
Section 377
IPC has a damaging impact

     upon the lives of homosexuals inasmuch as it not only

     perpetuates social stigma and police/public abuse but also

     drives    homosexual         activity     underground       thereby

     jeopardizing      HIV/AIDS   prevention      efforts    and,     thus,

     rendering gay men and MSM increasingly vulnerable to

     contracting HIV/AIDS.


9.   Further, it has been submitted on behalf of the petitioner

     that
Section 377
IPC's legislative objective of penalizing

     "unnatural sexual acts" has no rational nexus to the

     classification    created    between     procreative     and      non-

     procreative sexual acts, and is thus violative of
Article 14
of

     the Constitution of India.
Section 377
's legislative objective

     is based upon stereotypes and misunderstanding that are

     outmoded and enjoys no historical or logical rationale which

     render it arbitrary and unreasonable.        It is further the case

     of the petitioner that the expression "sex" as used in
Article

     15
cannot be read restrictive to "gender" but includes

     "sexual orientation" and, thus read, equality on the basis of

     sexual orientation is implied in the said fundamental right

     against    discrimination.     The      petitioner     argues     that

     criminalization     of   predominantly      homosexual         activity

     through
Section 377
IPC is discriminatory on the basis of

     sexual orientation and, therefore, violative of
Article 15.
It

     is further the case of the petitioner that the prohibition

     against homosexuality in
Section 377
IPC curtails or

[WP(C)7455/2001]                                     Page 9 of 105
       infringes the basic freedoms guaranteed under
Article 19 (1)

      (a) (b) (c)
& (d); in that, an individual's ability to make

      personal statement about one's sexual preferences, right of

      association/assembly and right to move freely so as to

      engage in homosexual conduct are restricted and curtailed.


10.   Broadly on the above reasoning, it has been submitted that

      there is a case for consensual sexual intercourse (of the kind

      mentioned above; i.e. homosexual) between two willing

      adults in privacy to be saved and excepted from the penal

      provision contained in
Section 377
IPC.


      REPLY BY UNION OF INDIA - CONTRADICTORY STANDS OF
      MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS AND MINISTRY OF HEALTH &
      FAMILY WELFARE
11.   A rather peculiar feature of this case is that completely

      contradictory affidavits have been filed by two wings of

      Union of India. The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) sought to

      justify the retention of
Section 377
IPC, whereas the Ministry

      of Health & Family Welfare insisted that continuance of
Section 377
IPC has hampered the HIV/AIDS prevention

      efforts. We shall first deal with the affidavit of the Ministry

      of Home Affairs.    The Director (Judicial) in the Ministry of

      Home Affairs, Government of India, in his affidavit, seeks to

      justify the retention of
Section 377
IPC on the statute book

      broadly on the reason that it has been generally invoked in

      cases   of   allegation   of   child   sexual    abuse   and     for

      complementing lacunae in the rape laws and not mere



[WP(C)7455/2001]                                      Page 10 of 105
       homosexuality. This penal clause has been used particularly

      in cases of assault where bodily harm is intended and/or

      caused. It has been submitted that the impugned provision

      is necessary since the deletion thereof would well open

      flood gates of delinquent behaviour and can possibly be

      misconstrued     as     providing    unfettered     licence      for

      homosexuality.        Proceeding    on   the   assumption       that

      homosexuality is unlawful, it has been submitted in the

      affidavit that such acts cannot be rendered legitimate only

      because the person to whose detriment they are committed

      has given consent to it. Conceding ground in favour of right

      to respect for private and family life, in the submission of

      Union of India, interference by public authorities in the

      interest of public safety and protection of health as well as

      morals is equally permissible.


12.   Terming the issues raised in the petition at hand as a

      subject relating to policy of law rather than that of its

      legality, Union of India relies upon the reports of Law

      Commission of India particularly on the issue whether to

      retain or not to retain
Section 377
IPC. Reference has been

      made to 42nd report of the Commission wherein it was

      observed that Indian society by and large disapproved of

      homosexuality, which disapproval was strong enough to

      justify it being treated as a criminal offence even where the

      adults indulge in it in private. Union of India submits that

      law cannot run separately from the society since it only

[WP(C)7455/2001]                                     Page 11 of 105
       reflects the perception of the society. It claims that at the

      time of initial enactment,
Section 377
IPC was responding to

      the values and morals of the time in the Indian society. It

      has been submitted that in fact in any parliamentary secular

      democracy, the legal conception of crime depends upon

      political as well as moral considerations notwithstanding

      considerable overlap existing between legal and safety

      conception of crime i.e. moral factors.


13.   Acknowledging that there have been legal reforms in a large

      number of countries so as to de-criminalise homosexual

      conduct, Union of India seeks to attribute this trend of

      change to increased tolerance shown by such societies to

      new sexual behaviour or sexual preference.       Arguing that

      public tolerance of different activities undergoes change

      with the times in turn influencing changes in laws, it is

      sought to be pointed out that even the reforms in the nature

      of Sexual Offences Act, 1967 (whereby buggery between

      two consenting adults in private ceased to be an offence in

      the United Kingdom) had its own share of criticism on the

      ground that the legislation had negatived the right of the

      state to suppress 'social vices'. Union of India argues that

      Indian society is yet to demonstrate readiness or willingness

      to show greater tolerance to practices of homosexuality.

      Making out a case in favour of retention of
Section 377
IPC

      in the shape it stands at present, Union of India relies on the

      arguments of public morality, public health and healthy

[WP(C)7455/2001]                                  Page 12 of 105
       environment claiming that
Section 377
IPC serves the

      purpose.


14.   From the above summary of submissions of the Union of

      India through the MHA it is clear that the thrust of the

      resistance to the claim in the petition is founded on the

      argument of public morality. Though the MHA has referred

      to the issue of public health and healthy environment, the

      affidavit has not set out elaborately the said defence.


      AFFIDAVIT OF NACO / MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE


15.   National Aids Control Organisation (NACO) has submitted its

      response in the shape of an affidavit affirmed by the Under

      Secretary of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, which

      thus also represents the views of the said Ministry of the

      Government of India.         The submissions of NACO only

      confirm the case set out by the petitioner that homosexual

      community    (MSM    etc.)    is   particularly   susceptible   to

      attracting HIV/AIDS in which view a number of initiatives

      have been taken by NACO to ensure that proper HIV

      intervention and prevention efforts are made available to

      the said section of the society by, amongst other things,

      protecting and promoting their rights. In the reply affidavit,

      NACO states that the groups identified to be at greater risk

      of acquiring and transmitting HIV infection due to a high

      level of risky behaviour and insufficient capacity or power

      for decision making to protect themselves from infection,


[WP(C)7455/2001]                                    Page 13 of 105
       generally described as 'High Risk Groups' (HRG), broadly

      include men who have sex with men (MSM) and female sex

      workers and injecting drug users.


16.   NACO has adopted a strategy for preventing and further

      transmission of infection, which include the following efforts:


      (a)   The strategy for preventing and the further

      transmission of infection includes:


        i. Making the General Population and High Risk

            Groups         aware        through    strategic   IEC

            (Information Education Communication) & BCC

            (Behaviour Change Communication) providing

            them with the necessary tools and information

            for protecting themselves from HIV infection.


        ii. Motivating safer sexual practices by reducing

            sexual partners, being faithful to a single

            partner abstaining from casual sex and the

            correct and consistent use of condoms.


        iii. Controlling    Sexually      Transmitted    Infections

            (STIs) among High Risk Groups along with

            promoting       use    of    condoms   as   preventive

            measure.


        iv. Peer education and Community participation

            (being the essential component of Primary

            Health Care).


[WP(C)7455/2001]                                        Page 14 of 105
           v. Ensuring availability of safe blood and blood

            products; and


          vi. Reinforcing the traditional Indian moral values

            of   abstinence,     delayed   sexual   debut   till

            marriage and fidelity among youth and other

            impressionable groups of population.


    (b)     To    create    an     enabling   socio-economic

    environment so that all sections of population can

    have access to proper information, health care &

    counseling services to protect themselves from the

    infection and at the same time empower families and

    communities to provide better care & support to

    people living with HIV/AIDS.


    (c)     Improving services for the care of people living

    with AIDS both in hospital and at homes through

    community care.


17. In the reply affidavit filed on behalf of NACO, it has been

    submitted that the report of the Expert Group on Size

    Estimation of Population with High Risk Behaviour for NACP-

    III Planning, January 2006 estimated that there are about 25

    lakh MSM (Men having sex with men). The National Sentinel

    Surveillance Data 2005 shows that more than 8% of the

    population of MSM is infected by HIV while the HIV

    prevalence among the general population is estimated to be

    lesser than 1%. Given the high vulnerability of MSM to HIV

[WP(C)7455/2001]                                    Page 15 of 105
     infection, NACO has developed programmes for undertaking

    targeted interventions among them.          These projects are

    implemented by NGOs with financial support from NACO.

    Presently 1,46,397 MSM (6%) are being covered through 30

    targeted interventions.     Under the targeted intervention

    projects, the objectives are to:


    a.    reduce number of partners and by bringing

    about a change in their behaviour;


    b.    reduce their level of risk by informing them

    about and providing access to condoms;


    c.    providing access to STD services.


18. According to the submissions of NACO, those in the High Risk

    Group are mostly reluctant to reveal same sex behaviour

    due to the fear of law enforcement agencies, keeping a large

    section invisible and unreachable and thereby pushing the

    cases of infection underground making it very difficult for the

    public health workers to even access them. It illustrates this

    point by referring to the data reflected in the National

    Baseline Behaviour Surveillance Survey (NBBSS of 2002)

    which indicates that while 68.6% MSM population is aware

    about the methods of preventing infection, only 36% of them

    actually use condoms.      NACO has further submitted that

    enforcement of
Section 377
IPC against homosexual groups

    renders   risky   sexual   practices   to   go   unnoticed    and

    unaddressed inasmuch as the fear of harassment by law

[WP(C)7455/2001]                                 Page 16 of 105
     enforcement    agencies    leads    to   sex     being     hurried,

    particularly because these groups lack 'safe place', utilise

    public places for their indulgence and do not have the option

    to consider or negotiate safer sex practices. It is stated that

    the   very   hidden   nature   of   such   groups        constantly

    inhibits/impedes interventions under the National AIDS

    Control Programme aimed at prevention.              Thus NACO

    reinforces the plea raised by the petitioner for the need to

    have an enabling environment where the people involved in

    risky behaviour are encouraged not to conceal information

    so that they can be provided total access to the services of

    such preventive efforts.


    RESPONSES OF OTHER RESPONDENTS

19. 'Voices against
Section 377
IPC' (hereinafter referred to as

    "respondent No.8") is a coalition of 12 organisations that

    represent child rights, women's rights, human rights, health

    concerns as well as the rights of same sex desiring people

    including those who identify as Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual,

    Transgenders, Hijra and Kothi persons (which are referred to

    in the affidavit as "LGBT").   It has been submitted on its

    behalf that organisations that constitute respondent No.8 are

    involved in diverse areas of public and social importance and

    that in the course of their work they have repeatedly come

    across gross violation of basic human rights of "LGBT"

    persons, both as a direct and indirect consequence of the

    enforcement of
Section 377
IPC.      It relies upon its report

[WP(C)7455/2001]                                   Page 17 of 105
     tilted 'Rights for All : Ending Discrimination under
Section

    377
' published in 2004 to create awareness about negative

    impact of this law on society in general and Lesbian, Gay,

    Bisexual and Transgenders people in particular.


20. Respondent No.8 supports the cause espoused by the

    petitioner in this PIL and avers that
Section 377
IPC, which

    criminalises 'carnal intercourse against the order of the

    nature', is an unconstitutional and arbitrary law based on

    archaic    moral    and    religious      notions   of   sex   only     for

    procreation.       It    asserts   that     criminalisation    of    adult

    consensual sex under
Section 377
IPC does not serve any

    beneficial public purpose or legitimate state interest. On the

    contrary, according to respondent No.8,
Section 377
IPC by

    criminalising the aforementioned kinds of sexual acts has

    created an association of criminality towards people with

    same sex desires. It pleads that the continued existence of

    this provision on the statute book creates and fosters a

    climate    of    fundamental       rights   violations    of   the     gay

    community, to the extent of bolstering their extreme social

    ostracism.


21. To illustrate the magnitude and range of exploitation and

    harsh     and    cruel    treatment    experienced       as    a     direct

    consequence of
Section 377
IPC, respondent No.8 has placed

    on record material in the form of affidavits, FIRs, judgments

    and     orders   with    objectively      documented     instances      of


[WP(C)7455/2001]                                        Page 18 of 105
     exploitation, violence, rape and torture suffered by LGBT

    persons.   The particulars of the incidents are drawn from

    different parts of the country. In an instance referred to as

    "Lucknow incident - 2002" in the report titled 'Epidemic of

    Abuse : Police Harassment of HIV/AIDS Outreach Workers in

    India' published by Human Rights Watch, the police during

    investigation of a complaint under
Section 377
IPC picked up

    some information about a local NGO (Bharosa Trust) working

    in the area of HIV/AIDS prevention and sexual health

    amongst MSMs raided its office, seized safe sex advocacy

    and information material and arrested four health care

    workers. Even in absence of any prima facie proof linking

    them to the reported crime under
Section 377
IPC, a

    prosecution was launched against the said health care

    workers on charges that included
Section 292
IPC treating

    the educational literature as obscene material. The health

    workers remained in custody for 47 days only because
Section 377
IPC is a non-bailable offence.


22. Then there is a reference to 'Bangalore incident, 2004'

    bringing out instances of custodial torture of LGBT persons.

    The victim of the torture was a hijra (eunuch) from

    Bangalore, who was at a public place dressed in female

    clothing. The person was subjected to gang rape, forced to

    have oral and anal sex by a group of hooligans. He was later

    taken to police station where he was stripped naked,

    handcuffed to the window, grossly abused and tortured

[WP(C)7455/2001]                                 Page 19 of 105
     merely because of his sexual identity. Reference was made

    to a judgment of the High Court of Madras reported as

    Jayalakshmi v. The State of Tamil Nadu, (2007) 4 MLJ

    849, in which an eunuch had committed suicide due to the

    harassment and torture at the hands of the police officers

    after he had been picked up on the allegation of involvement

    in a case of theft. There was evidence indicating that during

    police custody he was subjected to torture by a wooden stick

    being inserted into his anus and some police personnel

    forcing him to have oral sex.      The person in question

    immolated himself inside the police station on 12.6.2006 and

    later succumbed to burn injuries on 29.6.2006.             The

    compensation of Rs.5,00,000/- was awarded to the family of

    the victim.   Another instance cited is of a case where the

    Magistrate in his order observed that the case involved a

    hidden allegation of an offence under
Section 377
IPC as

    well, thereby stretching the reach of
Section 377
IPC to two

    lesbian adult women who were involved in a romantic

    relationship with each other while the initial accusation was

    only under
Section 366
IPC. An affidavit of a gay person is

    also filed on record. The person was picked up from a bus

    stand at about 10 p.m. by the police, who accused him of

    being a homosexual. He was physically assaulted with

    wooden sticks, taken to police post where he was subjected

    to sexual and degrading abusive language.        During the

    incarceration in the police post over the night, four police


[WP(C)7455/2001]                              Page 20 of 105
     men actually raped and sexually abused him including

    forcing him to have oral and anal sex. The respondent No.8

    has relied upon several other instances of fundamental

    rights violation of homosexuals and gay persons.                        The

    material on record, according to the respondent No.8, clearly

    establishes that the continuance of
Section 377
IPC on the

    statute book operate to brutalise a vulnerable, minority

    segment of the citizenry for no fault on its part.                      The

    respondent No.8 contends that a section of society has been

    thus   criminalised     and      stigmatized      to    a   point     where

    individuals are forced to deny the core of their identity and

    vital dimensions of their personality.


23. Respondents      No.1    (Govt.      of     NCT        of   Delhi),    No.2

    (Commissioner of Police, Delhi) and No.3 (Delhi State Aids

    Control Society) did not file any counter affidavit/pleadings.

    Respondent      No.6    (Joint     Action   Council         Kannur)     and

    respondent No.7 (Mr. B.K.Singhal), who were impleaded as

    intervenors, filed counter affidavits mainly adopting the

    views / stand of the Ministry of Home Affairs, Union of India

    on the issue.


    ARGUMENTS


24. Learned counsel appearing for the parties have addressed

    the Court at length.          During the course of submissions,

    extensive references were made to voluminous material

    which included various reports, publications, articles, Indian


[WP(C)7455/2001]                                           Page 21 of 105
     and foreign judgments including those of US Supreme Court,

    European Commission of Human Rights, Human Rights

    Committee etc.      Counsel also provided comprehensive

    written submissions supported by authorities but as we

    understand it, the prime arguments can be generally

    summarised in this way:-


    (i)   The submission of Mr. Anand Grover, Sr. Advocate,

    appearing for the petitioner, and Mr. Shyam Divan, Sr.

    Advocate, appearing for respondent No.8, is that
Section 377
IPC violates the constitutional protections embodied in
Articles 14
, 19
and
21.
It suffers from the vice of

    unreasonable classification and is arbitrary in the way it

    unfairly targets the homosexuals or gay community. It also

    unreasonably and unjustly infringes upon the right of

    privacy, both zonal and decisional.      It also conveys the

    message that homosexuals are of less value than other

    people, demeans them and unconstitutionally infringes upon

    their right to live with dignity.
Section 377
IPC also creates

    structural impediments to the exercise of freedom of speech

    and expression and other freedoms under
Article 19
by

    homosexuals or gays and is not protected by any of the

    restrictions contained therein.    Furthermore, morality by

    itself cannot be a valid ground for restricting the right under
Articles 14
and
21.
Public disapproval or disgust for a

    certain class of persons can in no way serve to uphold the

    constitutionality of a statute.     In any event, abundant

[WP(C)7455/2001]                                Page 22 of 105
     material has been placed on record which shows that the

    Indian society is vibrant, diverse and democratic and

    homosexuals have significant support in the population. It is

    submitted that courts in other jurisdictions have struck down

    similar laws that criminalise same-sex sexual conduct on the

    grounds of violation of right to privacy or dignity or equality

    or all of them. Keeping in mind that
Section 377
IPC is the

    only law that punishes child sexual abuse and fills a lacuna

    in rape law, it is prayed that
Section 377
IPC may be

    declared as constitutionally invalid insofar as it affects

    private sexual acts between consenting adults or in the

    alternative to read down
Section 377
IPC to exclude

    consenting same-sex sexual acts between adults.


    (ii)   In reply, learned ASG submits that there is no

    fundamental right to engage in the same sex activities. In

    our country,    homosexuality       is abhorrent   and        can be

    criminalised by imposing proportional limits on the citizens'

    right to privacy and equality.       Learned ASG submits that

    right to privacy is not absolute and can be restricted for

    compelling state interest.
Article 19(2)
expressly permits

    imposition of restrictions in the interest of decency and

    morality. Social and sexual mores in foreign countries cannot

    justify   de-criminalisation   of    homosexuality       in    India.

    According to him, in the western societies the morality

    standards are not as high as in India. Learned ASG further

    submits that
Section 377
IPC is not discriminatory as it is

[WP(C)7455/2001]                                 Page 23 of 105
     gender neutral. If
Section 377
IPC is struck down there will

    be no way the State can prosecute any crime of non-

    consensual carnal intercourse against the order of nature or

    gross male indecency. He hastens to add that
Section 377
IPC is not enforced against homosexuals and there is no

    need to "read down" the provisions of
Section 377
IPC.

    Learned ASG further contends that spread of AIDS is

    curtailed by
Section 377
IPC and de-criminalisation of

    consensual - same - sex acts between adults would cause a

    decline in public health across society generally since it

    would foster the spread of AIDS.     He submits that
Section

    377
IPC does not impact upon the freedom under
Article

    19(1)
as what is criminalised is only a sexual act. People will

    have the freedom to canvass any opinion of their choice

    including the opinion that homosexuality must be de-

    criminalised. He, therefore, submits that the
Section 377
IPC

    is constitutionally valid.


    (iii)   Mr.Ravi Shankar Kumar, appearing for respondent

    No.6, and Mr.H.P. Sharma, appearing for respondent No.7,

    submitted that the petitioner's arguments with respect to

    the spread of HIV and AIDS are founded on propaganda and

    are not factually correct.
Section 377
IPC prevents HIV by

    discouraging rampant homosexuality.       According to them,

    Indian society considers homosexuality to be repugnant,

    immoral and contrary to the cultural norms of the country.



[WP(C)7455/2001]                                Page 24 of 105
ARTICLE 21
, THE RIGHT TO LIFE AND PROTECTION OF A PERSON'S
    DIGNITY, AUTONOMY AND PRIVACY



25. Until the decision of the Supreme Court in Maneka Gandhi

    v. Union of India, (1978) 1 SCC 248, a rather narrow and

    constricted meaning was given to the guarantee embodied

    in
Article 21.
But in Maneka Gandhi, a seven-Judge Bench

    decision, P.N. Bhagwati, J. (as his Lordship then was) held

    that the expression "personal liberty" in
Article 21
is of the

    widest amplitude and it covers a variety of rights which go to

    constitute the personal liberty of man and some of them

    have been raised to the status of distinct fundamental rights

    and give additional protection under
Article 19.
Any law

    interfering with personal liberty of a person must satisfy a

    triple test: (i) it must prescribe a procedure; (ii) the

    procedure must withstand a test of one or more of the

    fundamental rights conferred under
Article 19
which may be

    applicable in a given situation; and (iii) it must also be liable

    to be tested with reference to
Article 14.
As the test

    propounded by
Article 14
pervades
Article 21
as well, the

    law and procedure authorising interference with the personal

    liberty must also be right and just and fair and not arbitrary,

    fanciful or oppressive. If the procedure prescribed does not

    satisfy the requirement of
Article 14
, it would be no

    procedure at all within the meaning of
Article 21.
The Court

    thus expanded the scope and ambit of the right to life and

    personal liberty enshrined in
Article 21
and sowed the seed

[WP(C)7455/2001]                                 Page 25 of 105
     for future development of the law enlarging this most

    fundamental of the fundamental rights.       This decision in

    Maneka Gandhi became the starting point for a very

    significant evolution of the law culminating in the decisions

    in M.H. Hoskot v. State of Maharashtra, (1978) 3 SCC

    544, Hussainara Khatoon and Ors. v. Home Secretary

    State of Bihar, (1980) 1 SCC 81, Sunil Batra v. Delhi

    Admn., (1978) 4 SCC 494, Prem Shankar Shukla v. Delhi

    Admn., (1980) 3 SCC 526, Francis Coralie Mullin v.

    Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi and others,

    (1981) 1 SCC 608.


    DIGNITY


26. Dignity as observed by L'Heureux-Dube, J is a difficult

    concept to capture in precise terms [Egan v. Canada,

    (1995) 29 CRR (2nd) 79 at 106]. At its least, it is clear that

    the constitutional protection of dignity requires us to

    acknowledge the value and worth of all individuals as

    members of our society.    It recognises a person as a free

    being who develops his or her body and mind as he or she

    sees fit. At the root of the dignity is the autonomy of the

    private will and a person's freedom of choice and of action .

    Human dignity rests on recognition of the physical and

    spiritual integrity of the human being, his or her humanity,

    and his value as a person, irrespective of the utility he can

    provide to others. The expression "dignity of the individual"



[WP(C)7455/2001]                               Page 26 of 105
     finds specific mention in the Preamble to the Constitution of

    India.   V.R. Krishna Iyer, J. observed that the guarantee of

    human dignity forms part of our constitutional culture [Prem

    Shankar Shukla v. Delhi Admn. (supra),page 529 of SCC].


27. In Francis Coralie Mullin v. Administrator, Union

    Territory of       Delhi   and others (supra), Justice P.N.

    Bhagwati explained the concept of right to dignity in the

    following terms:


      "... We think that the right to life includes the right to live
      with human dignity and all that goes along with it,
      namely, the bare necessaries of life such as adequate
      nutrition, clothing and shelter and facilities for reading,
      writing and expressing oneself in diverse forms, freely
      moving about and mixing and commingling with fellow
      human beings. ......... Every act which offends against or
      impairs human dignity would constitute deprivation pro
      tanto of this right to live and it would have to be in
      accordance with reasonable, fair and just procedure
      established by law which stands the test of other
      fundamental rights." [para 8 of SCC]


28. The Canadian Supreme Court in Law v. Canada (Ministry

    of Employment and Immigration), [1999 1 S.C.R. 497]

    attempts to capture the concept of dignity in these words :


      "Human dignity means that an individual or group feels
      self-respect and self-worth.     It is concerned with
      physical and psychological integrity and empowerment.
      Human dignity is harmed by unfair treatment premised
      upon personal traits or circumstances which do not
      relate to individual needs, capacities, or merits. It is
      enhanced by laws which are sensitive to the needs,
      capacities, and merits of different individuals, taking
      into account the context underlying their differences.
      Human dignity is harmed when individuals and groups
      are marginalized, ignored, or devalued, and is enhanced
      when laws recognise the full place of all individuals and
      groups within Canadian society."[at para 53]

[WP(C)7455/2001]                                   Page 27 of 105
     PRIVACY



29.
Article 12
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights

    (1948) refers to privacy and it states:


      "No one shall be subjected to arbitrary interference with
      his privacy, family, home or correspondence nor to
      attacks upon his honour and reputation. Everyone has
      the right to the protection of the law against such
      interference or attacks."
Article 17
of the International Covenant of Civil and Political

    Rights (to which India is a party), refers to privacy and states

    that:


      "No one shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful
      interference with his privacy, family, home and
      correspondence, nor to unlawful attacks on his honour
      and reputation."
30. The European Convention on Human Rights also states that:


      "1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and
      family life, his home and his correspondence.
      2. There shall be no interference by a public authority
      except such as is in accordance with law and is
      necessary in a democratic society in the interests of
      national security, public safety or the economic well-
      being of the country, for the protection of health or
      morals or for the protection of the rights and freedoms
      of others."
31. In India, our Constitution does not contain a specific

    provision as to privacy but the right to privacy has, as we

    shall presently show, been spelt out by our Supreme Court

    from the provisions of
Article 19(1)(a)
dealing with freedom

    of speech and expression,
Article 19(1)(d)
dealing with right

    to freedom of movement and from
Article 21
, which deals


[WP(C)7455/2001]                                 Page 28 of 105
     with right to life and liberty. We shall first refer to the case-

    law in US relating to the development of the right to privacy

    as these cases have been adverted to in the decisions of our

    Supreme Court. Olmstead v. United States, 277 US 438

    (1928), was a case of wire-tapping or electronic surveillance

    and where there was no actual physical invasion, the

    majority held that the action was not subject to Fourth

    Amendment      restrictions.   But,   in   his    dissent,   Justice

    Brandeis, stated that the amendment protected the right to

    privacy which meant "the right to be let alone", and its

    purpose was "to secure conditions favourable to the pursuit

    of happiness", while recognising "the significance of man's

    spiritual nature, of his feelings and intellect: the right sought

    "to protect Americans in their beliefs, their thoughts, their

    emotions and their sensations" (page 478).             The dissent

    came to be accepted as the law after another four decades.


32. In Griswold v. State of Connecticut, 381 US 479 (1965),

    the Court invalidated a state law prohibiting the use of drugs

    or devices of contraception and counseling or aiding and

    abetting the use of contraceptives. The Court described the

    protected interest as a right to privacy and placed emphasis

    on the marriage relation and the protected space of the

    marital bedroom.


33. After Griswold it was established that the right to make

    certain decisions regarding sexual conduct extends beyond


[WP(C)7455/2001]                                     Page 29 of 105
     the marital relationship. In Eisenstadt v. Baired, 405 US

    438 (1972), the Court invalidated a law prohibiting the

    distribution of contraceptives to unmarried persons. The

    case was decided under the Equal Protection Clause; but

    with respect to unmarried persons, the Court went on to

    state the fundamental proposition that the law impaired the

    exercise of their personal rights.          It quoted from the

    statement of the Court of Appeals finding the law to be in

    conflict with fundamental human rights, and it observed:


      "It is true that in Griswold the right of privacy in
      question inhered in the marital relationship..... If the
      right of privacy means anything, it is the right of the
      individual married or single, to be free from
      unwarranted governmental intrusion into matters so
      fundamentally affecting a person as the decision
      whether to bear or beget a child." [para 453]


34. Jane Roe v. Wade, 410 US 113 (1973), was a case in which

    an unmarried pregnant woman, who wished to terminate her

    pregnancy by abortion instituted action in the United States

    District Court for the Northern District of Texas, seeking a

    declaratory judgment that the Texas Criminal Abortion

    Statutes, which prohibited abortions except with respect to

    those procured or attempted by medical advice for the

    purpose   of   saving   the   life    of    the    mother,    were

    unconstitutional.    The   Court     said   that   although    the

    Constitution of the USA does not explicitly mention any right

    of privacy, the United States Supreme Court recognised that

    a right of personal privacy or a guarantee of certain areas or


[WP(C)7455/2001]                                  Page 30 of 105
     zones of privacy, does exist under the Constitution, and that

    the roots of that right may be found in the First Amendment,

    in the Fourth and Fifth Amendments, in the penumbras of

    the Bill of Rights in the Ninth Amendment and in the concept

    of liberty guaranteed by the first section of the Fourteenth

    Amendment.     In Planned Parenthood of Southeastern

    Pa v. Casey, 505 US 833 (1992), the Court again confirmed

    the constitutional protection to personal decisions relating to

    marriage, procreation, contraception, family relationships,

    child rearing and education.    In explaining the respect the

    Constitution demands for the     autonomy of the person in

    making these choices, the Court stated as follows:


          "These matters, involving the most intimate and
          personal choices a person may make in a lifetime,
          choices central to personal dignity and autonomy,
          are central to the liberty protected by the
          Fourteenth Amendment. At the heart of liberty is
          the right to define one's own concept of existence,
          of meaning, of the universe, and of the mystery of
          human life. Beliefs about these matters could not
          define the attributes of personhood were they
          formed under compulsion of the State." [page
          851]


    DEVELOPMENT OF LAW OF PRIVACY IN INDIA


35. In Kharak Singh v. The State of U.P., (1964) 1 SCR 332,

    the U.P. Regulations regarding domiciliary visits were in

    question and the majority referred to Munn v. Illinois, 94

    US 113 (1877), and held that though our Constitution did not

    refer to the right to privacy expressly, still it can be traced

    from the right to "life" in
Article 21.
According to the

[WP(C)7455/2001]                                Page 31 of 105
     majority, clause 236 of the relevant Regulations in U.P., was

    bad in law; it offended
Article 21
inasmuch as there was no

    law permitting interference by such visits. The majority did

    not go into the question whether these visits violated the

    "right to privacy". But, Subba Rao, J. while concurring that

    the fundamental right to privacy was part of the right to

    liberty in
Article 21
, part of the right to freedom of speech

    and expression in
Article 19(1)(a)
, and also of the right of

    movement in
Article 19(1)(d)
, held that the Regulations

    permitting surveillance violated the fundamental right to

    privacy. In effect, all the seven learned Judges held that the

    "right to privacy" was part of the right to "life" in
Article 21.
36. We now come to the celebrated judgment in Gobind v.

    State of M.P., (1975) 2 SCC 148, in which Mathew, J.
developed the law as to privacy from where it was left in

    Kharak Singh. The learned Judge referred to Griswold v.

    Connecticut and Jane Roe v. Henry Wade and observed:
"There can be no doubt that the makers of our
      Constitution wanted to ensure conditions favourable to
      the pursuit of happiness. They certainly realized as
      Brandeis, J. said in his dissent in Olmstead v. United
      States, 277 US 438, 471 the significance of man's
      spiritual nature, of his feelings and of his intellect and
      that only a part of the pain, pleasure, satisfaction of life
      can be found in material things and therefore they must
      be deemed to have conferred upon the individual as
      against the Government a sphere where he should be
      let alone." [para 20 of SCC]
37. Mathew, J. held that privacy - dignity claims deserve to be

    examined with care and to be denied only when an
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                  Page 32 of 105
important countervailing interest is shown to be superior, or

    where a compelling state interest was shown. If the court

    then finds that a claimed right is entitled to protection as a

    fundamental privacy right, a law infringing it must satisfy the

    compelling state interest test. Then the question would be

    whether the state interest is of such paramount importance

    as would justify an infringement of the right.     The learned

    Judge observed that the right to privacy will have to go

    through a process of case-by-case development.                The

    learned Judge further observed that the right is not absolute.
The issue whether enforcement of morality is a State

    interest sufficient to justify infringement of fundamental

    "privacy right" was held not necessary to be considered for

    purposes of the case. The Court refused "to enter into the

    controversial thicket whether enforcement of morality is a

    function of the State."
38. A two-Judge Bench in
R. Rajagopal v. State of T.N.
, (1994)

    6 SCC 632, held the right to privacy to be implicit in the right

    to life and liberty guaranteed to the citizens of India by
Article 21.
"It is the right to be left alone". A citizen has a

    right to safeguard the privacy of his own, his family,

    marriage,   procreation,   motherhood,    child   bearing     and

    education among many other matters.
39.
In
District Registrar and Collector, Hyderabad and

    another v. Canara Bank and another
, (2005) 1 SCC 496,
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                 Page 33 of 105
another two-Judge Bench held that the right to privacy dealt

    with persons and not places.
The right to privacy has been

    accepted as implied in our Constitution, in other cases,

    namely, People's Union for
Civil Liberties v. Union of

    India
, (
1997) 1 SCC 301 and Sharda v. Dharampal
, (2003)

    4 SCC 493.
SECTION 377
IPC
AS AN INFRINGEMENT OF THE RIGHTS TO
     DIGNITY AND PRIVACY
40. The right to privacy thus has been held to protect a "private

    space in which man may become and remain himself". The

    ability to do so is exercised in accordance with individual

    autonomy. Mathew J. in
Gobind v. State of M.P.
(supra)

    referring to the famous Article, "The Right to Privacy" by

    Charles Warren and Louis D. Brandeis, (4 HLR 193), stressed

    that privacy - the right to be let alone - was an interest that

    man should be able to assert directly and not derivatively

    from his efforts to protect other interests.
Blackmun, J. in his

    dissent in Bowers, Attorney General of Georgia v.

    Hardwick et al, 478 US 186 (1986), made it clear that the

    much - quoted "right to be let alone" should be seen not

    simply as a negative right to occupy a private space free

    from government intrusion, but as a right to get on with your

    life, your personality and make fundamental decisions about

    your intimate relations without penalisation.      The privacy

    recognises that we all have a right to a sphere of private

    intimacy and autonomy which allows us to establish and
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                 Page 34 of 105
nurture human relationships without interference from the

    outside community. The way in which one gives expression

    to one's sexuality is at the core of this area of private

    intimacy.      If, in expressing one's sexuality, one acts

    consensually and without harming the other, invasion of that

    precinct will be a breach of privacy. (Ackermann J. in The

    National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality v. The

    Minister of Justice, decided by Constitutional Court of

    South Africa on 9th October, 1998).
41. In Bowers v. Hardwick (supra) Blackmun, J. cited the

    following passage from Paris Adult Theatre I v. Slaton,

    [413 US 49 (1973), page 63] :
"Only the most willful blindness could obscure the fact
      that sexual intimacy is a sensitive, key relationship of
      human existence, central to family life, community
      welfare, and the development of human personality.
      The way in which we give expression to our sexuality is
      at the core of this area of private intimacy. If, in
      expressing our sexuality, we act consensually and
      without harming one another, invasion of that precinct
      will be a breach of our privacy."
SEXUALITY AND IDENTITY
42. There is a growing jurisprudence and other law related

    practice that identifies a significant application of human

    rights   law   with   regard   to   people   of   diverse   sexual

    orientations and gender identities. This development can be

    seen at the international level, principally in the form of

    practice related to the United Nations - sponsored human

    rights treaties, as well as under the European Convention on
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                  Page 35 of 105
Human Rights. The sexual orientation and gender identity -

    related human rights legal doctrine can be categorised as

    follows: (a)non-discrimination;   (b)   protection   of   private

    rights; and (c) the ensuring of special general human rights

    protection to all, regardless of sexual orientation or gender

    identity.
43. On 26th March, 2007, a group of human rights experts

    launched the Yogyakarta Principles on the Application of

    Human Rights Law in Relation to Sexual Orientation and

    Gender Identity (Yogyakarta Principles). The principles are

    intended as a coherent and comprehensive identification of

    the obligation of States to respect, protect and fulfill the

    human rights of all persons regardless of their sexual

    orientation or gender identity.   The experts came from 25

    countries representative of all geographical regions.       They

    included one former UN High Commissioner for Human

    Rights, 13 current or former UN Human Rights Special

    Mechanism Office Holders or Treaty Body Members, two

    serving Judges on domestic courts and a number of

    academics and activists. Although relatively short period of

    time has elapsed since the launch of the Principles, a

    number of member and observer States have already cited

    them in Council proceedings.      Within days of the Geneva

    launch, more than 30 States made positive interventions on

    sexual orientation and gender identity issues, with seven

    States specifically referring to the Yogyakarta Principles.
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                 Page 36 of 105
[Michael O'Flaherty and John Fisher, "Sexual Orientation,

    Gender Identity and International        Human Rights Law:
Contextualising the Yogyakarta Principles" - Human Rights

    Law Review 8:2 (2008), 207-248].
44. The Yogyakarta Principles define the expression "sexual

    orientation" and "gender identity" as follows:
"Sexual Orientation" is understood to refer to each
      person's capacity for profound emotional, affectional
      and sexual attraction to, and intimate and sexual
      relations with, individuals of a different gender or the
      same gender or more than one gender;"
"Gender Identity" is understood to refer to each
      person's deeply felt internal and individual experience
      of gender, which may or may not correspond with the
      sex assigned at birth, including the personal sense of
      the body (which may involve, if freely chosen,
      modification of bodily appearance or function by
      medical, surgical or other means) and other expressions
      of gender, including dress, speech and mannerisms."
The Principles recognise:
   Human beings of all sexual orientation and gender
             identities are entitled to the full enjoyment of all
             human rights;
   All persons are entitled to enjoy the right to
             privacy, regardless of sexual orientation or gender
             identity;
   Every citizen has a right to take part in the
             conduct of public affairs including the right to
             stand for elected office, to participate in the
             formulation of policies affecting their welfare, and
             to have equal access to all levels of public service
             and employment in public functions, without
             discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or
             gender identity.
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                Page 37 of 105
45. Prof Edwin Cameron in his Article "Sexual Orientation and

    the Constitution : A Test Case for Human Rights", (1993) 110

    SALJ 450 defines sexual orientation:
".... sexual orientation is defined by reference to erotic
      attraction: in the case of heterosexuals, to members of
      the opposite sex; in the case of gays and lesbians, to
      members of the same sex. Potentially a homosexual or
      gay or lesbian person can therefore be anyone who is
      erotically attracted to members of his or her own sex."
46. In Bernstein and Others v. Bester and Others NNO,

    1996 (4) BCLR 449 (CC), Ackermann J. pointed out that the

    scope of privacy had been closely related to the concept of

    identity and that "rights, like the right to privacy, are not

    based on a notion of the unencumbered self, but on the

    notion of what is necessary to have one's autonomous

    identity ..... In the context of privacy this means that it is .....

    the inner sanctum of the person such as his/her family life,

    sexual preference and home environment which is shielded

    from erosion by conflicting rights of the community." [para

    117]
47. The Supreme Court has acknowledged that the sphere of

    privacy deals with persons and not places. Explaining this

    concept in District Registrar & Collector, Hyderabad v.

    Canara Bank (Supra) Lahoti, CJ. referred to observations of

    Stevens, J. in Thornburgh v. American College of O and

    G, 476 US 747 (1986), that "the concept of privacy

    embodies the moral fact that a person belongs to himself

    and not to others nor to society as a whole". Lahoti, CJ. also
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                   Page 38 of 105
referred to an observation of a commentator in (1976) 64

    Cal. L. Rev 1447, that privacy centers round values of

    repose, sanctuary and intimate decision.       Repose refers to

    freedom from unwanted stimuli; sanctuary to protection

    against intrusive observation; and intimate decision, to

    autonomy with respect to the most personal of life choices.

    For every individual, whether homosexual or not, the sense

    of gender and sexual orientation of the person are so

    embedded in the individual that the individual carries this

    aspect of his or her identity wherever he or she goes.           A

    person cannot leave behind his sense of gender or sexual

    orientation at home. While recognising the unique worth of

    each person, the Constitution does not presuppose that a

    holder of rights is as an isolated, lonely and abstract figure

    possessing a disembodied and socially disconnected self. It

    acknowledges    that   people   live   in   their   bodies,   their

    communities, their cultures, their places and their times.

    The expression of sexuality requires a partner, real or

    imagined. It is not for the state to choose or to arrange the

    choice of partner, but for the partners to choose themselves.

    [Sachs, J. in The National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian

    Equality v. The Minister of Justice (supra)].
48. The sphere of privacy allows persons to develop human

    relations without interference from the outside community or

    from the State.    The exercise of autonomy enables an

    individual to attain fulfillment, grow in self-esteem, build
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                  Page 39 of 105
relationships of his or her choice and fulfill all legitimate

    goals that he or she may set. In the Indian Constitution, the

    right to live with dignity and the right of privacy both are

    recognised as dimensions of
Article 21.
Section 377
IPC

    denies a person's dignity and criminalises his or her core

    identity solely on account of his or her sexuality and thus

    violates
Article 21
of the Constitution. As it stands,
Section

    377
IPC denies a gay person a right to full personhood which

    is implicit in notion of life under
Article 21
of the

    Constitution.
IMPACT OF CRIMINALISATION ON HOMOSEXUALS
49. Prof. Ryan Goodman of the Harvard Law School, in his well

    researched study of the impact of the sodomy laws on

    homosexuals in South Africa argues that condemnation

    expressed through the law shapes an individual's identity

    and self-esteem. Individuals ultimately do not try to conform

    to the law's directive, but the disapproval communicated

    through it, nevertheless, substantively affects their sense of

    self-esteem, personal identity and their relationship to the

    wider society.   Based on field research, he argues that

    sodomy laws produce regimes of surveillance that operate in

    a dispersed manner, and that such laws serve to embed

    illegality within the identity of homosexuals. He categorises

    how sodomy laws reinforce public abhorrence of lesbians

    and gays resulting in an erosion of self-esteem and self-

    worth in numerous ways, including (a) self-reflection, (b)
[WP(C)7455/2001]                               Page 40 of 105
reflection of self through family, (c) verbal assessment and

    disputes, (d) residential zones and migrations, (e) restricted

    public places, (f) restricted movement and gestures, (g)

    "safe places" and (h) conflicts with law enforcement

    agencies. (Beyond the Enforcement Principle: Sodomy Laws,

    Social Norms and Social Panoptics", 89 Cal. L. Rev. 643).
50. The studies conducted in different parts of world including

    India show that the criminalisation of same-sex conduct has

    a negative impact on the lives of these people. Even when

    the penal provisions are not enforced, they reduce gay men

    or   women      to    what    one      author       has    referred    to    as

    "unapprehended         felons",     thus    entrenching          stigma     and

    encouraging discrimination in different spheres of life. Apart

    from   misery        and   fear,   a    few    of    the     more     obvious

    consequences are harassment, blackmail, extortion and

    discrimination.       There is extensive material placed on the

    record in the form of affidavits, authoritative reports by well

    known agencies and judgments that testify to a widespread

    use of
Section 377
IPC to brutalise MSM and gay community.

    Some    of    the      incidents        illustrating      the    impact      of

    criminalisation on homosexuality are earlier noted by us.

    We may quote another glaring example.                       During Colonial

    period in India, eunuchs (hijras) were criminalised by virtue

    of their identity.
The Criminal Tribes Act, 1871
was enacted

    by the British in an effort to police those tribes and

    communities       who      'were       addicted      to    the    systematic
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                              Page 41 of 105
commission of non-bailable offences.' These communities

    and tribes were deemed criminal by their identity, and mere

    belonging to one of those communities rendered the

    individual criminal.      In 1897, this Act was amended to

    include eunuchs.       According to the amendment the local

    government was required to keep a register of the names

    and   residences     of   all   eunuchs   who      are   "reasonably

    suspected   of     kidnapping    or   castrating    children   or   of

    committing offences under
Section 377
IPC.               Commenting

    on the Criminal Tribes Act in a speech made in 1936, Pt.

    Jawaharlal Nehru said:
"I am aware of the monstrous provisions of the
Criminal
      Tribes Act
which constitute a negation of civil liberty...
      an attempt should be made to have the Act removed
      from the statute book. No tribe can be classed as
      criminal as such and the whole principle as such is out
      of consonance with civilized principles of criminal justice
      and treatment of offenders..." [Dalip D'Souza, Branded
      by law: Looking at India's Denotified Tribes, Penguin,
      New Delhi, 2001: page 57]
    While this Act has been repealed, the attachment of

    criminality to the hijra community still continues.
51. In 2006, the State of Tamil Nadu vide G.O. (Ms) No.199

    dated 21.12.2006 recognising that "aravanis (hijras) are

    discriminated by the society and remain isolated" issued

    directions thus:
"I.   counseling be given to children who may feel
      different from other individuals in terms of their gender
      identity.
II. Family counseling by the teachers with the help of
      NGOs sensitized in that area should be made mandatory
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                    Page 42 of 105
so that such children are not disowned by their families.
        The C.E.O.s, D.E.O.s, District Social Welfare Officers and
        Officers of Social Defence are requested to arrange
        compulsory counseling with the help of teachers and
        NGOs in the Districts wherever it is required.
        III.  Admission in School and Colleges should not be
        denied based on their sex identity. If any report is
        received of denying admission of aravani's suitable
        disciplinary action should be taken by the authorities
        concerned."
52.   The criminalisation of homosexuality condemns in perpetuity

      a sizable section of society and forces them to live their lives

      in the shadow of harassment, exploitation, humiliation, cruel

      and    degrading   treatment     at   the    hands        of    the   law

      enforcement machinery. The Government of India estimates

      the MSM number at around 25 lacs. The number of lesbians

      and transgenders is said to be several lacs as well. This vast

      majority (borrowing the language of the South African

      Constitutional Court) is denied "moral full citizenship".
Section 377
IPC grossly violates their right to privacy and

      liberty embodied in
Article 21
insofar as it criminalises

      consensual sexual acts between adults in private.                 These

      fundamental rights had their roots deep in the struggle for

      independence and, as pointed out by Granville Austin in

      "The Indian Constitution - Cornerstone of A Nation", "they

      were   included    in   the   Constitution   in     the        hope   and

      expectation that one day the tree of true liberty would

      bloom in India".    In the words of Justice V.R. Krishna Iyer

      these rights are cardinal to a decent human order and
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                        Page 43 of 105
protected by constitutional armour. The spirit of Man is at

      the root of
Article 21
, absent liberty, other freedoms are

      frozen. [Maneka Gandhi (supra) at para 76 SCC]


      GLOBAL TRENDS IN PROTECTION OF PRIVACY DIGNITY RIGHTS OF
      HOMOSEXUALS
53.   The   first   successful   international   human   rights   cases

      concerning the privacy on same-sex relations were taken

      under the ECHR. In Dudgeon v. The United Kingdom, 45

      Eur. Ct. H.R. (ser. A) (1981), and Norris v. Republic of

      Ireland, 142 Eur. Ct. H.R. (ser. A) (1988), the criminalisation

      of such practices was deemed a violation of the privacy

      protection in
Article 8
of the ECHR.       In Dudgeon v. The

      United Kingdom, the European Court of Human Rights held

      that "maintenance in force of the impugned legislation

      constitutes a continuing interference with the applicant's

      right to respect for his private life (which includes his sexual

      life) within the meaning of
Article 8
para 1 (
art.8-1
). In the

      personal circumstances of the applicant, the very existence

      of this legislation continuously and directly affect his private

      life. In Norris v. Republic of Ireland, the European Court

      of Human Rights ruled that Ireland's blanket prohibition on

      gay sex breached the ECHR. The Court quoted with approval

      the finding of an Irish Judge that:
"[o]ne of the effects of criminal sanctions against
        homosexual acts is to reinforce the misapprehension
        and general prejudice of the public and increase the
        anxiety and guilt feelings of homosexuals leading, on
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                    Page 44 of 105
occasion, to depression and the serious consequences
        which can follow ..." [para 21]
54.   In Modinos v. Cyprus, 259 Eur. Ct. H.R. (ser. A) (1993), the

      European Court of Human Rights again held that such a law

      violated the right to privacy, and maintained that even a

      "consistent policy" of not bringing prosecutions under the

      law was no substitute for full repeal.
55.   In Toonen v. Australia, (No.488/1992 CCPR/C/ 50/D/488

      /1992, March 31, 1994), the Human Rights Committee held

      that the continuous existence of Tasmanian sodomy laws

      violates
Article 17
of International Covenant of Civil and

      Political Rights. The Committee observed:
"The Committee considers that sections 122(a) and (c)
        and 123 of the Tasmanian Criminal Code "interfere"
with the author's privacy, even if these provisions have
        not been enforced for a decade. In this context, it notes
        that the policy of the Department of Public Prosecutions
        not to initiate criminal proceedings in respect of private
        homosexual conduct does not amount to a guarantee
        that no actions will be brought against homosexuals in
        the future, particularly in the light of undisputed
        statements of the Director of Public Prosecutions of
        Tasmania in 1988 and those of members of the
        Tasmanian Parliament. The continued existence of the
        challenged provisions therefore continuously and
        directly "interferes" with the author's privacy."[para 8.2]
56.   In The National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality

      v. The Minister of Justice (supra), the Constitutional Court

      of South Africa struck down the sodomy laws on the ground

      of violation of rights to privacy, dignity and equality.

      Ackermann J. narrated the palpable invasion of their rights:
"The common-law prohibition on sodomy criminalises all
        sexual intercourse per anum between men: regardless
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                  Page 45 of 105
of the relationship of the couple who engage therein, of
      the age of such couple, of the place where it occurs, or
      indeed of any other circumstances whatsoever. In so
      doing, it punishes a form of sexual conduct which is
      identified by our broader society with homosexuals. Its
      symbolic effect is to state that in the eyes of our legal
      system all gay men are criminals. The stigma thus
      attached to a significant proportion of our population is
      manifest. But the harm imposed by the criminal law is
      far more than symbolic. As a result of the criminal
      offence, gay men are at risk of arrest, prosecution and
      conviction of the offence of sodomy simply because
      they seek to engage in sexual conduct which is part of
      their experience of being human. Just as apartheid
      legislation rendered the lives of couples of different
      racial groups perpetually at risk, the sodomy offence
      builds insecurity and vulnerability into the daily lives of
      gay men. There can be no doubt that the existence of a
      law which punishes a form of sexual expression for gay
      men degrades and devalues gay men in our broader
      society. As such it is a palpable invasion of their dignity
      and a breach of
section 10
of the Constitution." [para
      28]
57. In Lawrence v. Texas, 539 US 558 (2003), holding the

    Texas sodomy laws as unconstitutional, the US Supreme

    Court reversed its earlier decision in Bowers v. Hardwick

    (supra). Kennedy, J., who delivered the opinion of the Court,

    said:
".... It suffices for us to acknowledge that adults may
      choose to enter upon this relationship in the confines of
      their homes and their own private lives and still retain
      their dignity as free persons. When sexuality finds overt
      expression in intimate conduct with another person, the
      conduct can be but one element in a personal bond that
      is more enduring.         The liberty protected by the
      Constitution allows homosexual persons the right to
      make this choice. ...... [page 567]
      ......The issue is whether the majority may use the
      power of the State to enforce these views on the whole
      society through operation of the criminal law. "Our
      obligation is to define the liberty of all, not to mandate
      our own moral code." [page 571]
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                Page 46 of 105
.....When homosexual conduct is made criminal by the
         law of the State, that declaration in and of itself is an
         invitation    to   subject  homosexual     persons     to
         discrimination both in the public and in the private
         spheres. ..." [page 575]
58. Since 1967 the process of change has informed legal

    attitude    towards   sexual   orientation.   This   process    has

    culminated in the de-criminalisation of sodomy in private

    between consenting adults, in several jurisdictions.            The

    superior courts in some of these jurisdictions have struck

    down anti-sodomy laws, where such laws remain on the

    statute book. In 1967 in England and Wales and in 1980 in

    Scotland sodomy between consenting adult males in private

    was de-criminalised.       However, in Northern Ireland the

    criminal law relating to sodomy remained unchanged.               In

    1982, in pursuance of the decision of the ECHR in Dudgeon

    v.    United    Kingdom     (supra),   sodomy    between       adult

    consenting males in private was de-criminalised in Northern

    Ireland. The same conclusion was reached in 1988 in Norris

    v. Ireland (supra) and Ireland repealed sodomy laws in 1993.

    Laws prohibiting homosexual activity between consenting

    adults in private having eradicated within 23 member-states

    that had joined the Council of Europe in 1989 and of the 10

    European countries that         had joined since (as at 10th

    February, 1995), nine had de-criminalised sodomy laws

    either before or shortly after their membership applications

    were granted. In Australia, all the States with the exception
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                   Page 47 of 105
of Tasmania, had by 1982 de-criminalised sexual acts in

    private between consenting adults and had also passed anti-

    discrimination laws which prohibited discrimination on the

    ground, amongst others, of sexual orientation. Tasmania

    repealed offending sections in its Criminal Code in 1997 in

    view of the decision of United Nations Human Rights

    Committee in Toonen v. Australia. Consensual sexual

    relations between adult males have been de-criminalised in

    New   Zealand.       In   Canada,   consensual   adult   sodomy

    ("Buggery") and so-called "gross indecency" were de-

    criminalised by statute in 1989 in respect of such acts

    committed in private between 21 years and older which was

    subsequently brought down to age of 18 years or more. In

    United States of America though the challenge to sodomy

    laws was turned down in Bowers v. Hardwick (supra), but

    subsequently in Lawrence v.Texas, the sodomy laws

    insofar as between consenting adults in private were struck

    down. A number of open democratic societies have turned

    their backs to criminalisation of sodomy laws in private

    between consenting adults despite the fact that sexual

    orientation      is not expressly protected in the equality

    provisions of their constitutions.    Homosexuality has been

    de-criminalised in several countries of Asia, Africa and South

    America.      The High Court of Hongkong in its judgments in

    Leung T.C.William Roy v. Secy for Justice, dated 24th

    August, 2005 and 20th September, 2006 struck down similar
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                Page 48 of 105
sodomy laws.      To the same effect is the judgment of the

    High Court of Fiji in Dhirendra Nandan & Another v.

    State, Criminal Appeal Case No. HAA 85 & 86 of 2005,

    decided on 26th August, 2005. Nepalese Supreme Court has

    also struck down the laws criminalising homosexuality in

    2008 [Supreme Court of Nepal, Division Bench, Initial Note of

    the Decision 21.12.2007].
59. On 18th "December, 2008, in New York, the UN General

    Assembly was presented with a statement endorsed by 66

    States from around the world calling for an end to

    discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender

    identity. The statement, read out by the UN Representative

    for   Argentina      Jorge   Arguella,   condemns    violence,

    harassment, discrimination, exclusion, stigmatisation, and

    prejudice based on sexual orientation and gender identity. It

    also condemns killings and executions, torture, arbitrary

    arrest, and deprivation of economic, social, and cultural

    rights on those grounds. The statement read at the General

    Assembly reaffirms existing protections for human rights in

    international law.    It builds on a previous joint statement

    supported by 54 countries, which Norway delivered at the

    UN Human Rights Council in 2006. UN High Commissioner

    for Human Rights, who addressed the General Assembly via

    a video taped message stated:
"Ironically many of these laws, like Apartheid laws that
      criminalised sexual relations between consenting adults
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                Page 49 of 105
of different races, are relics of the colonial and are
       increasingly recognised as anachronistic and as
       inconsistent both with international law and with
       traditional values of dignity, inclusion and respect for
       all."
COMPELLING STATE INTEREST
60. The Union Ministry of Home Affairs has opposed the petition

    claiming, inter alia, that
Section 377
IPC is a justified

    interference by "public authorities in the interest of public

    safety and protection of health and morals." On the other

    hand, Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has

    supported the petition and admitted that
Section 377
IPC, by

    criminalising consensual sex between adults of the same

    sex, hampers HIV intervention efforts aimed at sexual

    minorities. Indeed it is the plea of the petitioner that
Section

    377
IPC infringes right to health as embodied in
Article 21
of

    the Constitution of India. We shall take up the issue of public

    safety and health first.
SECTION 377
IPC
AS AN IMPEDIMENT TO PUBLIC HEALTH
61.
Article 12
of the International Covenant on Economic, Social

    and Cultural Rights makes it obligatory on the "State to fulfill

    everyone's right to the highest attainable standard of

    health." The Supreme Court of India interpreting
Article 21
of the Indian Constitution in the light of
Article 12
of the

    Covenant held that the right to health inhered in the
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                 Page 50 of 105
fundamental right to life under
Article 21.
[
Paschim Banga

    Khet Mazdoor Samity v. State of W.B.
, (1996) 4 SCC 37].
62. It is submitted by NACO that Section 377 acts as a serious

    impediment     to   successful   public   health   interventions.

    According to NACO, those in the High Risk Group are mostly

    reluctant to reveal same-sex behaviour due to fear of law

    enforcement agencies, keeping a large section invisible and

    unreachable and thereby pushing the cases of infection

    underground making it very difficult for the public health

    workers to even access them. The situation is aggravated

    by the strong tendencies created within the community who

    deny MSM behaviour itself. Since many MSM are married or

    have sex with women, their female sexual partners are

    consequently also at risk for HIV/infection. The NACO views

    it imperative that the MSM and gay community have the

    ability to be safely visible through which HIV/AIDS prevention

    may    be    successfully   conducted.     Clearly,   the   main

    impediment is that the sexual practices of the MSM and gay

    community are hidden because they are subject to criminal

    sanction.
63. General Comment No.14 (2000) [E/C.12/2000/4; 11 August

    2000] on
Article 12
of the International Covenant on

    Economic, Social and Cultural Rights states that right to

    health is not to be understood as a right to be healthy. The

    right to health contains both freedoms and entitlements.
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                  Page 51 of 105
The freedoms include the right to control one's health and

    body, including sexual reproductive freedom, and the right

    to be free from interference, such as the right to be free

    from   torture,   non-consensual      medical      treatment      and

    experimentation. By contrast, the entitlements include the

    right to a system of health, protection which provides

    equality of opportunity for people to enjoy the highest

    attainable level of health. It further states:
"Non-discrimination and equal treatment
      By virtue of
article 2.2
and
article 3
, the Covenant
      proscribes any discrimination in access to health care
      and underlying determinants of health, as well as to
      means and entitlements for their procurement, on the
      grounds of race, colour, sex, language, religion, political
      or other opinion, national or social origin, property,
      birth, physical or mental disability, health status
      (including HIV/AIDS), sexual orientation and civil,
      political, social or other status, which has the intention
      or effect of nullifying or impairing the equal enjoyment
      or exercise of the right to health. The Committee
      stresses that many measures, such as most strategies
      and programmes designed to eliminate health-related
      discrimination, can be pursued with minimum resource
      implications through the adoption, modification or
      abrogation of legislation or the dissemination of
      information..." [para 18]
64. The 2001 UN General Assembly Special Session (UNGASS)

    Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS, held on                 25-27

    June, 2001, adopted by all UN Member States emphasised

    the importance of "addressing the needs of those at the

    greatest risk of, and most vulnerable to, new infection as

    indicated by such factors as ... sexual practices." In 2005, 22

    governments       from    different    regions       along        with
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                     Page 52 of 105
representatives    of    non-governmental      organisations     and

    people living with HIV as members of the UNAIDS governing

    board, called for the development of programmes targeted

    at key affected groups and populations, including men who

    have sex with men, describing this as "one of the essential

    policy   actions   for    HIV   prevention".    [UNAIDS    (2005)

    Intensifying HIV Prevention, Geneva, Joint United Nations

    Programme on HIV/AIDS]. Since then, country and regional

    consultations have confirmed that the stigma, discrimination

    and criminalisation faced by men who have sex with men are

    major barriers to the movement for universal access to HIV

    prevention, treatment, care and support. [United Nations

    A/60/737 Assessment by UNAIDS to the General Assembly on

    Scaling up HIV Prevention, Treatment, Care and Support,

    March 24, 2006]. At the 2006 High Level Meeting on AIDS,

    the Member States and civil society members reiterated the

    commitment underlining the need for "full and active

    participation of vulnerable groups ... and to eliminate all

    forms of discrimination against them .... while respecting

    their privacy and confidentiality". [Paragraph 64 of 2001

    Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and Paragraphs 20

    and 29 of the 2006 Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS]. In this

    context UNAIDS, inter alia, recommended the following:
"Respect, protect and fulfill the rights of men who have
      sex with men and address stigma and discrimination in
      society and in the workplace by amending laws
      prohibiting sexual acts between consenting adults in
      private; enforcing anti-discrimination; providing legal
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                    Page 53 of 105
aid services, and promoting campaigns that address
      homophobia." [HIV and Sex between Men : UNAIDS]
65. A report of the National Conference on Human Rights and

    HIV/AIDS, held on 24-25 November, 2000 in New Delhi and

    organised by the National Human Rights Commission, in

    collaboration with other organisations, concludes:
"Therefore, to more successfully prevent and manage
      HIV/AIDS among these marginalized populations,
      (intravenous drug users and MSA), a revision of the
      existing     laws    and     processes  is   strongly
      recommended........ In terms of preventing HIV/AIDS
      among men who have sex with men, it would be most
      useful to make
section 377
IPC obsolete, and instead
      review the legislation and endeavour to define more
      clearly the age of sexual consent.
....     ....    ....   ....     ....
In a nutshell, the protection of Human Rights and the
      empowerment of marginalized populations would, in the
      context of HIV/AIDS prevention, create an environment
      that would enable India to reach the most vulnerable
      with HIV/AIDS messages and supporting mechanisms."
[Report of the National Conference on Human Rights
      and HIV/AIDS : http://nhrc.nic.in/Publications/report_hiv-
      aids.htm]
66. The "Delhi Declaration                    of Collaboration,    2006" issued

    pursuant to International Consultation on Male Sexual Health

    and HIV, co-hosted by the Government of India, UNAIDS and

    Civil Society Organisations, recognised that: "... the stigma,

    discrimination and criminalisation faced by men who have

    sex with men, gay men and transgender people are major

    barriers      to    universal        access      to   HIV    prevention      and

    treatment"         [Delhi        Declaration     of   Collaboration    :     26th
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                                Page 54 of 105
September, 2006].        On June 30, 2008, the Prime Minister

    Mr.Manmohan Singh in a speech delivered at the release of

    the Report of the Commission on AIDS in Asia stated "the

    fact that many of the vulnerable social groups, be they sex

    workers or homosexuals or drug users, face great social

    prejudice has made the task of identifying AIDS victims and

    treating them very difficult" [Prime Minister's address on the

    release of the Report of the Commission on AIDS in Asia:
June 30, 2006]. On August 08, 2008, the Union Minister of

    Health   and    Family    Welfare,   Dr.    Ambumani     Ramadoss

    speaking at the 17th International Conference on Aids in

    Mexico   City   is   reported   to   have    stated   "....structural

    discrimination against those who are vulnerable to HIV such

    as sex workers and MSM must be removed if our prevention,

    care and treatment programmes are to succeed". He said,

    "
Section 377
of the Indian Penal Code, which criminalises

    men who have sex with men, must go" [Reported in Indian

    Express: August 9,2006 http://www.indianexpress.com/story/

    346649.html].    Union Minister of Health is also reported to

    have stated at the International HIV/AIDS Conference in

    Toronto, 2006 that
Section 377
IPC was to be amended as

    part of the government's measures to prevent HIV/AIDS.[The

    Hindu: August 16,2006]
67. There is almost unanimous medical and psychiatric opinion

    that homosexuality is not a disease or a disorder and is just

    another expression of human sexuality. Homosexuality was
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                    Page 55 of 105
removed from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of

    Mental Disorders (DSM) in 1973 after reviewing evidence

    that homosexuality is not a mental disorder. In 1987, ego-

    dystonic homosexuality was not included in the revised third

    edition of the DSM after a similar review. In 1992, the World

    Health Organisation removed homosexuality from its list of

    mental   illnesses   in   the   International   Classification   of

    Diseases (ICD 10).        Guidelines of the ICD 10 reads:
"disorders of sexual preference are clearly differentiated

    from disorders of gender identity and homosexuality in itself

    is no longer included as a category."
68. According to the Amicus brief filed in 2002 by the American

    Psychiatric Association before the United States Supreme

    Court in the case of Lawrence v. Texas:
"According to current scientific and professional
      understanding, however, the core feelings and
      attractions that form the basis for adult sexual
      orientation typically emerge between middle childhood
      and early adolescence. Moreover, these patterns of
      sexual attraction generally arise without any prior
      sexual experience." [page 7 of Amicus brief]
    Thus, homosexuality is not a disease or mental illness that

    needs to be, or can be, 'cured' or 'altered', it is just another

    expression of human sexuality.
69. Learned Additional Solicitor General made an attempt at

    canvassing the interest of public health to justify retention of
Section 377
IPC on the statute book. He referred to the UN

    Report on Global AIDS Epidemic, 2008, particularly the
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                    Page 56 of 105
section dealing with Asia to highlight that HIV /AIDS is

    transmitted through the route of sex and specifically that of

    sex by men-with-men. Reliance was placed on the findings

    indicated at pages 47-50 of the Report to the effect that in

    Asia an estimated 5.0 million people were living with HIV in

    2007 out of which 3,80,000 people were those who had been

    newly infected in that year alone. The UN Report attributes

    this alarming increase in the HIV infection, amongst others,

    to "unprotected sex" in which unprotected anal sex between

    men is stated to be a potential significant factor.        Learned

    ASG placed reliance on a number of articles, papers and

    reports, including publications of Centre for Disease Control

    and Prevention (CDC). The objective of ASG, in relying upon

    this material, is to show that HIV/AIDS is spread through sex

    and that men-to-men sex carries higher risk of exposure as

    compared to female-to-male or male-to-female. In his

    submission, de-criminalisation of
Section 377
IPC cannot be

    the cure as homosexuals instead need medical treatment

    and further that AIDS can be prevented by appropriate

    education, use of condoms and advocacy of other safe sex

    practices.
70. We are unable to accede to the submissions of learned ASG.

    The understanding of homosexuality, as projected by him, is

    at   odds    with   the   current   scientific   and   professional

    understanding.       As already noticed with reference to

    Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM),
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                     Page 57 of 105
as revised in 1987 (3rd edition), "homosexuality" is no longer

    treated as a disease or disorder and now near unanimous

    medical and psychiatric expert opinion treats it as just

    another expression of human sexuality.
71. The submission of ASG that
Section 377
IPC does not in any

    manner come in the way of MSM accessing HIV/AIDS

    prevention material or health care intervention is in contrast

    to that of NACO, a specialized agency of the government

    entrusted with the duty to formulate and implement policies

    for prevention of spread of HIV/AIDS. As mentioned earlier,

    NACO confirms the case of the petitioner that enforcement

    of
Section 377
IPC contributes adversely; in that, it leads to

    constantly inhibiting interventions through the National AIDS

    Control Programme undertaken by the said agency. It needs

    to be noted here that Government of India is a party to the

    declared commitment to address the needs of those at

    greater risk of HIV including amongst High Risk Groups, such

    as MSM [See United Nations General Assembly Declaration

    of Commitment on HIV/AIDS, 2001, at para 64; NACO,

    MoHFW, National AIDS Control Programme Phase III (2007-

    2012) Strategy and Implementation Plan, November 2006, at

    pages 18-32]. Thus, the submissions made orally on behalf

    of the Union of India are not borne out by the records. On

    one hand, the affidavit of NACO categorically states that
Section 377
IPC pushes gays and MSM underground, leaves

    them vulnerable to police harassment and renders them
[WP(C)7455/2001]                               Page 58 of 105
unable     to        access      HIV/AIDS   prevention         material   and

    treatment.           On the other, the extensively documented

    instances       of    NGOs       working    in   the   field    of   HIV/AIDS

    prevention and health care being targeted and their staff

    arrested under
Section 377
IPC amply demonstrate the

    impact of criminalization of homosexual conduct.
72. The submission of ASG that
Section 377
IPC helps in putting

    a brake in the spread of AIDS and if consensual same-sex

    acts between adults were to be de-criminalised, it would

    erode the effect of public health services by fostering the

    spread of AIDS is completely unfounded since it is based on

    incorrect and wrong notions.                Sexual transmission is only

    one of the several factors for the spread of HIV and the

    disease spreads through both homosexual as well as

    heterosexual conduct.               There is no scientific study or

    research work by any recognised scientific or medical body,

    or for that matter any other material, to show any causal

    connection            existing      between       decriminalisation        of

    homosexuality and the spread of HIV/AIDS. The argument, in

    fact, runs counter to the policy followed by the Ministry of

    Health and Family Welfare in combating the spread of this

    disease.
73. A similar line of argument advanced in the case of Toonen

    v.   State      of     Australia      (supra)    before    Human Rights

    Committee was rejected with the following observations:
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                            Page 59 of 105
"As far as the public health argument of the
          Tasmanian      authorities   is   concerned,   the
          Committee notes that the criminalization of
          homosexual practices cannot be considered a
          reasonable means or proportionate measure to
          achieve the aim of preventing the spread of
          AIDS/HIV. The Government of Australia observes
          that statutes criminalizing homosexual activity
          tend to impede public health programmes "by
          driving underground many of the people at the
          risk of infection". Criminalization of homosexual
          activity thus would appear to run counter to the
          implementation       of    effective     education
          programmes in respect of the HIV/AIDS
          prevention. Secondly, the Committee notes that
          no link has been shown between the continued
          criminalization of homosexual activity and the
          effective control of the spread of the HIV/AIDS
          virus."[para 8.5]
74. Learned ASG was at pains to argue that
Section 377
IPC is

    not    prone   to   misuse   as   it   is   not   enforced   against

    homosexuals but generally used in cases involving child

    abuse or sexual abuse. Again, the submission is against the

    facts. A number of documents, affidavits and authoritative

    reports of independent agencies and even judgments of

    various courts have been brought on record to demonstrate

    the widespread abuse of
Section 377
IPC for brutalising MSM

    and gay community persons, some of them of very recent

    vintage.    If the penal clause is not being enforced against

    homosexuals engaged in consensual acts within privacy, it

    only implies that this provision is not deemed essential for

    the protection of morals or public health vis-a-vis said

    section of society.     The provision, from this perspective,

    should fail the "reasonableness" test.
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                      Page 60 of 105
MORALITY AS A GROUND                 OF     A    RESTRICTION       TO
     FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
75. As held in
Gobind
(supra), if the court does find that a

    claimed right is entitled to protection as a fundamental

    privacy   right,   the   law   infringing    it   must   satisfy   the

    compelling state interest test.             While it could be "a

    compelling state interest" to regulate by law, the area for

    the protection of children and others incapable of giving a

    valid   consent    or    the   area   of     non-consensual        sex,

    enforcement of public morality does not amount to a

    "compelling state interest" to justify invasion of the zone of

    privacy of adult homosexuals engaged in consensual sex in

    private without intending to cause harm to each other or

    others.
In Lawrence v. Texas (supra), the Court held that

    moral disapproval is not by itself a legitimate state interest

    to justify a statute that bans homosexual sodomy.             Justice

    Kennedy observed:
"The present case does not involve minors. It
       does not involve persons who might be injured or
       coerced or who are situated in relationships
       where consent might not easily be refused. It
       does not involve public conduct or prostitution. It
       does not involve whether the government must
       give formal recognition to any relationship that
       homosexual persons seek to enter. The case does
       involve two adults who, with full and mutual
       consent from each other, engaged in sexual
       practices common to a homosexual lifestyle. The
       petitioners are entitled to respect for their private
       lives. The State cannot demean their existence or
       control their destiny by making their private
       sexual conduct a crime. Their right to liberty
       under the Due Process Clause gives them the full
       right to engage in their conduct without
       intervention of the government. "It is a promise of
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                      Page 61 of 105
the Constitution that there is a realm of personal
         liberty which the government may not enter." ....
         The Texas statute furthers no legitimate state
         interest which can justify its intrusion into the
         personal and private life of the individual."[page
         578]
76. Further, Justice O'Connor while concurring in the majority

    judgment added that:
"Indeed, we have never held that moral
         disapproval, without any other asserted state
         interest, is a sufficient rationale under the Equal
         Protection Clause to justify a law that
         discriminates among groups of persons."[page
         582]
77. In   Dudgeon     v.   United    Kingdom     (supra),   the   UK

    Government urged that there is feeling in Northern Ireland

    against the proposed change, as it would be seriously

    damaging to the moral fabric of Northern Irish society. The

    issue before the Court was to what extent, if at all, the

    maintenance in force of the legislation is "necessary in a

    democratic society" for these aims. The Court after referring

    to Wolfenden report observed that overall function served by

    the criminal law in this field is to preserve public order and

    decency and to protect the citizen from what is offensive or

    injurious. Furthermore, the necessity for some degree of

    control may even extend to consensual acts committed in

    private, where there is call to provide social safeguards

    against exploitation and corruption of others, particularly

    those who are specially vulnerable because they are young,

    weak in body or mind, inexperienced, or in a state of special
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                Page 62 of 105
physical, official, or economic dependence.         The Court

      concluded as follows:
"As compared with the era when that legislation
         was enacted, there is now a better understanding,
         and in consequence an increased tolerance, of
         homosexual behaviour to the extent that in the
         great majority of the member States of the
         Council of Europe it is no longer considered to be
         necessary or appropriate to treat homosexual
         practices of the kind now in question as in
         themselves a matter to which the sanctions of the
         criminal law should be applied; the Court cannot
         overlook the marked changes which have
         occurred in this regard in the domestic law of the
         member States ..... In Northern Ireland itself, the
         authorities have refrained in recent years from
         enforcing the law in respect of private
         homosexual acts between consenting males over
         the age of 21 years capable of valid consent. No
         evidence has been adduced to show that this has
         been injurious to moral standards in Northern
         Ireland or that there has been any public demand
         for stricter enforcement of the law.
It cannot be maintained in these circumstances
         that there is a "pressing social need" to make
         such acts criminal offences, there being no
         sufficient justification provided by the risk of harm
         to vulnerable sections of society requiring
         protection or by the effects on the public..." [para
         60]
78.   In Norris v. Republic of Ireland (supra), the Court drew a

      comparison with the Dudgeon case and relied on the

      reasoning in the latter case to hold that:
"It cannot be maintained that there is a "pressing
         social need" to make such acts criminal offences.
         On the specific issue of Proportionality, the Court
         is of the opinion that "such justifications as there
         are for retaining the law in force unamended are
         outweighed by the detrimental effects which the
         very existence of the legislative provisions in
         question can have on the life of a person of
         homosexual orientation like the applicant.
         Although members of the public who regard
         homosexuality as immoral may be shocked,
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                   Page 63 of 105
offended or disturbed by the commission by
         others of private homosexual acts, this cannot on
         its own warrant the application of penal sanctions
         when it is consenting adults alone who are
         involved." [para 46]
79.   Thus popular morality or public disapproval of certain acts is

      not a valid justification for restriction of the fundamental

      rights under
Article 21.
Popular morality, as distinct from a

      constitutional morality derived from constitutional values, is

      based on shifting and subjecting notions of right and wrong.

      If there is any type of "morality" that can pass the test of

      compelling    state   interest,   it   must    be   "constitutional"

      morality     and   not   public    morality.    This    aspect    of

      constitutional morality was strongly insisted upon by Dr.

      Ambedkar in the Constituent Assembly.           While moving the

      Draft Constitution in the Assembly [Constitutional Assembly

      Debates : Official Reports Vol.VII: November 4, 1948, page

      38], Dr. Ambedkar quoted Grote, the historian of Greece,

      who had said:
"The diffusion of constitutional morality, not
         merely among the majority of any community but
         throughout the whole, is an indispensable
         condition of government at once free and
         peaceable; since even any powerful and obstinate
         minority may render the working of a free
         institution impracticable without being strong
         enough     to  conquer    the  ascendancy    for
         themselves."
After quoting Grote, Dr. Ambedkar added:
"While everybody recognised the necessity of
         diffusion of constitutional morality for the
         peaceful working of the democratic constitution,
         there are two things interconnected with it which
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                      Page 64 of 105
are not, unfortunately, generally recognised. One
        is that the form of administration must be
        appropriate to and in the same sense as the form
        of the Constitution. The other is that it is perfectly
        possible to pervert the Constitution, without
        changing its form by merely changing its form of
        administration and to make it inconsistent and
        opposed to the spirit of the Constitution. ......The
        question is, can we presume such a diffusion of
        constitutional morality? Constitutional morality is
        not a natural sentiment. It has to be cultivated.
        We must realise that our people have yet to learn
        it. Democracy in India is only a top dressing on
        an Indian soil which is essentially undemocratic."
80. Granville Austin in his treatise "The Indian Constitution -

    Cornerstone       of   A     Nation"   had   said     that    the    Indian

    Constitution is first and foremost a social document.                    The

    majority of its provisions are either directly aimed at

    furthering the goals of the social revolution or attempt to

    foster   this    revolution      by    establishing     the    conditions

    necessary       for    its   achievement.       The      core       of   the

    commitments to the social revolution lies in Parts III and IV,

    in the Fundamental Rights and in the Directive Principles of

    State Policy. These are the conscience of the Constitution.

    The Fundamental Rights, therefore, were to foster the social

    revolution by creating a society egalitarian to the extent that

    all citizens were to be equally free from coercion or

    restriction by the state, or by society privately; liberty was

    no longer to be the privilege of the few. The Constitution of

    India recognises, protects and celebrates diversity.                      To

    stigmatise or to criminalise homosexuals only on account of

    their sexual orientation would be against the constitutional

    morality.
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                          Page 65 of 105
81. The question of the State in fact being a protector of

    constitutional    morality   was    also    canvassed    by     the

    Constitutional Court of South Africa in The National

    Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality v. The Minister

    of Justice (supra):
"A state that recognises difference does not mean
          a state without morality or one without a point of
          view. It does not banish concepts of right and
          wrong, nor envisage a world without good and
          evil..... The Constitution certainly does not debar
          the state from enforcing morality. Indeed, the Bill
          of Rights is nothing if not a document founded on
          deep political morality. What is central to the
          character and functioning of the State, however,
          is that the dictates of the morality which it
          enforces, and the limits to which it may go, are to
          be found in the text and spirit of the Constitution
          itself." [para 136]
82. The     Wolfenden     Committee     in     considering   whether

    homosexual acts between consenting adults in private

    should cease to be criminal offences examined a similar

    argument of morality in favour of retaining them as such. It

    was urged that conduct of this kind is a cause of the

    demoralisation and decay of civilisations, and that, therefore,

    unless the Committee wished to see the nation degenerate

    and decay, such conduct must be stopped, by every possible

    means. Rejecting this argument, the Committee observed:
"We have found no evidence to support this view, and we

    cannot feel it right to frame the laws which should govern

    this country in the present age by reference to hypothetical

    explanations of the history of other peoples in ages distant in

    time and different in circumstances from our own. In so far
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                   Page 66 of 105
as the basis of this argument can be precisely formulated, it

    is often no more than the expression of revulsion against

    what is regarded as unnatural, sinful or disgusting.          Many

    people feel this revulsion, for one or more of these reasons.
But moral conviction or instinctive feeling, however strong, is

    not a valid basis for overriding the individual's privacy and

    for bringing within the ambit of the criminal law private

    sexual behaviour of this kind." [para 54] The Committee

    regarded the function of the criminal law in this field as:
"to preserve public order and decency, to
             protect the citizen from what is offensive or
             injurious,   and     to    provide     sufficient
             safeguards     against      exploitation     and
             corruption of others, particularly those who
             are specially vulnerable because they are
             young, weak in body or mind, inexperienced,
             or in a state of special physical, official, or
             economic dependence, but not to intervene
             in the private lives of citizens, or to seek to
             enforce any particular pattern of behaviour,
             further than is necessary to carry out the
             purposes we have outlined." [para 13 and
             14]
83. In the 172nd report, the Law Commission has recommended

    deletion of
Section 377
IPC, though in its earlier reports it

    had recommended the retention of the provision. In the


    172nd report, the Law Commission of India, focused on the

    need to review the sexual offences laws in the light of

    increased incidents of custodial rape and crime of sexual

    abuse against youngsters, and inter alia, recommended

    deleting the
section 377
IPC by effecting the recommended

    amendments      in
Sections   375
to
376E
of   IPC.    The
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                  Page 67 of 105
Commission discussed various provisions related to sexual

    offences and was of considered opinion to amend provisions

    in the
Indian Penal Code
, 1860; the
Code of Criminal

    Procedure
, 1973; and
Indian Evidence Act, 1872
. In the

    Indian   penal   Code,   recasting   of   375
IPC
has   been

    recommended by redefining it under the head of 'Sexual

    Assault' encompassing all ranges of non consensual sexual

    offences/assaults, which in particular penalize not only the

    sexual intercourse with a woman as in accordance with the

    current 'Rape Laws'; but any non-consensual or non-willing

    penetration with bodily part or object manipulated by the

    another person except carried out for proper hygienic or

    medicinal purposes.
The recommended provision to substitute the existing
section 375
IPC reads thus:
"375.Sexual Assault: Sexual assault means -
(a) penetrating the vagina (which term shall include
       the labia majora),

       the anus or urethra of any person with -
i) any part of the body of another person or
ii) an object manipulated by another person

       except where such penetration is carried out for
       proper hygienic or medical purposes;
(b) manipulating any part of the body of another
       person so as to cause penetration of the vagina
       (which term shall include the labia majora), the
       anus or the urethra of the offender by any part of
       the other person's body;
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                    Page 68 of 105
(c) introducing any part of the penis of a person into
       the mouth of another person;
(d) engaging in cunnilingus or fellatio; or
(e) continuing sexual assault as defined in clauses
(a) to (d) above

       in circumstances falling under any of the six
       following descriptions:
First- Against the other person's will.
Secondly- Without the other person's consent.
Thirdly-    With the other person's consent when
       such consent has been obtained by putting such
       other person or any person in whom such other
       person is interested, in fear of death or hurt.
Fourthly- Where the other person is a female, with
       her consent, when the man knows that he is not the
       husband of such other person and that her consent
       is given because she believes that the offender is
       another man to whom she is or believes herself to
       be lawfully married.
Fifthly-   With the consent of the other person,
       when, at the time of giving such consent, by reason
       of unsoundness of mind or intoxication or the
       administration by the offender personally or through
       another of any stupefying or unwholesome
       substance, the other person is unable to understand
       the nature and consequences of that to which such
       other person gives consent.
Sixthly- With or without the other person's consent,
       when such other person is under sixteen years of
       age.
Explanation:      Penetration to any extent          is
       penetration for the purposes of this section.
Exception:    Sexual intercourse by a man with his
       own wife, the wife not being under sixteen years of
       age, is not sexual assault."
Pertinently, the major thrust of the recommendation is on

    the word 'Person' which makes the sexual offences gender
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                 Page 69 of 105
neutral unlike gender specific as under the 'Rape Laws'

      which is the current position in statute book. Amendments in

      section 376 A, 376B, 376C, 376D have been recommended

      on the same lines with enhanced punishments. An added

      explanation defining sexual intercourse is sought to be

      introduced governing section 376B, 376C, 376D. Insertion of

      new section 376 E has been recommended to penalize non

      consensual, direct or indirect, intentional unlawful sexual

      contact with part of body or with an object, any part of body

      of another person. This section specifically penalizes the

      person committing unlawful sexual contact who is in a

      position of trust or authority towards a young person (below

      the age of sixteen years), thereby protecting children.
Conclusively the
Section 377
IPC in the opinion of the

      Commission,    deserves   to   be    deleted   in   the   light   of

      recommended      amendments.        However    persons,    having

      carnal intercourse with any animal, were to be left to their

      just deserts. Though the Law Commission report would not

      expressly say so, it is implicit in the suggested amendments

      that elements of "will" and "consent" will become relevant to

      determine if the sexual contact (homosexual for the purpose

      at hand) constitute an offence or not.
84.   Our attention was also drawn to a statement of the Solicitor

      General of India appearing on behalf of India at the Periodic

      Review before the United Nations Human Rights Council that

      Indian society was accepting of sexual differences.               In
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                     Page 70 of 105
response to a question from the delegate from Sweden on

    the state of homosexual rights in India, he stated:
"Around the early 19th Century, you probably
       know that in England they frowned on
       homosexuality, and therefore there are historical
       reports that various people came to India to take
       advantage of its more liberal atmosphere with
       regard to different kinds of sexual conduct. ... As
       a result, in 1860 when we got the
Indian Penal
       Code
, which was drafted by Lord Macaulay, they
       inserted s.377 in the
Indian Penal Code
, which
       brought in the concept of "sexual offences
       against the order of nature". Now in India we
       didn't have this concept of something being
       "against the order of nature". It was essentially a
       Western concept which has remained over the
       years. Now homosexuality as such is not defined
       in the
Indian Penal Code
, and it will be a matter of
       great argument whether it's "against the order of
       nature".
[The  address of the Solicitor General of India before United
       Nations Human Rights Council: rtsp://webcast.un.org/ondemand/
       conferences/unhrc/upr/1st/hrc080410pm-ng.rm?start=02:18:32&
       end=02:37:42 at time index 16.30]
85. Justice Michael Kirby, a distinguished former Judge of

    Australian High Court, expressing in similar vein said that

    criminalisation of private, consensual homosexual acts is a

    legacy of one of three very similar criminal codes (of

    Macaulay, Stephen and Grifith), imposed on colonial people

    by the imperial rules of the British Crown.           Such laws are

    wrong:
   Wrong in legal principle because they
              exceed the proper ambit and function of the
              criminal law in a modern society;
   Wrong because they oppress a minority in
              the community and target them for an
              attribute of their nature that they do not
              choose and cannot change. In this respect
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                      Page 71 of 105
they are like other laws of colonial times
              that disadvantages people on the ground of
              their race or sex;
   Wrong because they fly in the face of
              modern scientific knowledge about the
              incidence and variety of human sexuality;
              and
             Wrong because they put a cohort of citizens
              into a position of stigma and shame that
              makes it hard to reach them with vital
              messages about safe sexual conduct,
              essential in the age of HIV/AIDS.
[Homosexual Law Reform : An Ongoing Blind Spot
       of the Commonwealth of Nations by the Hon'ble
       Michael    Kirby AC    CMG,    16th   National
       Commonwealth Law Conference, Hong Kong, 8th
       April, 2009].
86. The argument of the learned ASG that public morality of

    homosexual conduct might open floodgates of delinquent

    behaviour is not founded upon any substantive material,

    even from such jurisdictions where sodomy laws have been

    abolished. Insofar as basis of this argument is concerned, as

    pointed out by Wolfenden Committee, it is often no more

    than the expression of revulsion against what is regarded as

    unnatural, sinful or disgusting. Moral indignation, howsoever

    strong, is not a valid basis for overriding individuals's

    fundamental rights of dignity and privacy.In our scheme of

    things, constitutional morality must outweigh the argument

    of public morality, even if it be the majoritarian view.   In

    Indian context, the latest report (172nd) of Law Commission

    on the subject instead shows heightened realisation about

    urgent need to follow global trends on the issue of sexual
[WP(C)7455/2001]                              Page 72 of 105
offences. In fact, the admitted case of Union of India that
Section 377
IPC has generally been used in cases of sexual

    abuse or child abuse, and conversely that it has hardly ever

    been used in cases of consenting adults, shows that

    criminalisation of adult same- sex conduct does not serve

    any public interest. The compelling state interest rather

    demands that public health measures are strengthened by

    de-criminalisation of such activity, so that they can be

    identified and better focused upon.
87. For the above reasons we are unable to accept the stand of

    the Union of India that there is a need for retention of
Section 377
IPC to cover consensual sexual acts between

    adults in private on the ground of public morality.


    WHETHER SECTION 377
IPC
VIOLATES CONSTITUTIONAL
    GUARANTEE OF EQUALITY UNDER
ARTICLE 14
OF THE
    CONSTITUTION
88. The scope, content and meaning of
Article 14
of the

    Constitution has been the subject matter of intensive

    examination by the Supreme Court in a catena of decisions.

    The decisions lay down that though
Article 14
forbids class

    legislation, it does not forbid reasonable classification for the

    purpose of legislation. In order, however, to pass the test of

    permissible classification, two conditions must be fulfilled,

    namely, (i) that the classification must be founded on an

    intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things

    that are grouped together from those that are left out of the
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                 Page 73 of 105
group; and (ii) that the differentia must have a rational

    relation to the objective sought to be achieved by the

    statute in question.   The classification may be founded on

    differential basis according to objects sought to be achieved

    but what is implicit in it is that there ought to be a nexus,

    i.e., causal connection between the basis of classification

    and object of the statute under consideration.         [
Budhan

    Choudhry v. State of Bihar
, AIR 1955 SC 191].                  In

    considering reasonableness from the point of view of
Article

    14
, the Court has also to consider the objective for such

    classification. If the objective be illogical, unfair and unjust,

    necessarily the classification will have to be held as

    unreasonable.
[
Deepak    Sibal   v.   Punjab    University
,

    (1989) 2 SCC 145]
89. The other important facet of
Article 14
which was stressed in

    Maneka Gandhi is that it eschews arbitrariness in any form.

    The Court reiterated what was pointed out by the majority in
E.P. Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu
, (1974) 4 SCC 3

    that "from a positivistic point of view, equality is antithetic to

    arbitrariness".
90. Affirming and explaining this view, the Constitution Bench in
Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi
, (1981) 1 SCC 722

    held that it must, therefore, now be taken to be well settled

    that what
Article 14
strikes at is arbitrariness because any

    action that is arbitrary must necessarily involve negation of
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                  Page 74 of 105
equality.   The Court made it explicit that where an Act is

    arbitrary, it is implicit in it that it is unequal both according

    to political logic and constitutional law and is, therefore,

    violative of
Article 14.
THE CLASSIFICATION BEARS NO RATIONAL NEXUS TO THE
    OBJECTIVE SOUGHT TO BE ACHIEVED
91. The petitioner's case is that public morality is not the

    province of criminal law and
Section 377
IPC does not have

    any legitimate purpose.
Section 377
IPC makes no distinction

    between acts engaged in the public sphere and acts

    engaged in the private sphere. It also makes no distinction

    between the consensual and non-consensual acts between

    adults. Consensual sex between adults in private does not

    cause any harm to anybody.        Thus it is evident that the

    disparate grouping in
Section 377
IPC does not take into

    account relevant factors such as consent, age and the

    nature of the act or the absence of harm caused to anybody.

    Public animus and disgust towards a particular social group

    or vulnerable minority is not a valid ground for classification

    under
Article 14.
Section 377
IPC targets the homosexual

    community as a class and is motivated by an animus

    towards this vulnerable class of people.
92. According to Union of India, the stated object of
Section 377
IPC is to protect women and children, prevent the spread of

    HIV/AIDS     and     enforce    societal    morality     against

    homosexuality. It is clear that
Section 377
IPC, whatever its
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                 Page 75 of 105
present pragmatic application, was not enacted keeping in

    mind instances of child sexual abuse or to fill the lacuna in a

    rape law. It was based on a conception of sexual morality

    specific to Victorian era drawing on notions of carnality and

    sinfulness. In any way, the legislative object of protecting

    women and children has no bearing in regard to consensual

    sexual acts between adults in private.                   The second

    legislative purpose elucidated is that
Section 377
IPC serves

    the cause of public health by criminalising the homosexual

    behaviour.        As already held, this purported legislative

    purpose is in complete contrast to the averments in NACO's

    affidavit. NACO has specifically stated that enforcement of
Section 377
IPC adversely contributes to pushing the

    infliction underground, make risky sexual practices go

    unnoticed and unaddressed.
Section 377
IPC thus hampers

    HIV/AIDS prevention efforts. Lastly, as held earlier, it is not

    within the constitutional competence of the State to invade

    the privacy of citizens lives or regulate conduct to which the

    citizen alone is concerned solely on the basis of public

    morals.      The criminalisation of private sexual relations

    between consenting adults absent any evidence of serious

    harm deems the provision's objective both arbitrary and

    unreasonable.      The state interest "must be legitimate and

    relevant" for the legislation to be non-arbitrary and must be

    proportionate towards achieving the state interest.            If the

    objective    is   irrational,   unjust   and   unfair,    necessarily
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                    Page 76 of 105
classification will have to be held as unreasonable.               The

    nature of the provision of
Section 377
IPC and its purpose is

    to criminalise private conduct of consenting adults which

    causes no harm to anyone else.            It has no other purpose

    than to criminalise conduct which fails to conform with the

    moral or religious views of a section of society.                  The

    discrimination severely affects the rights and interests of

    homosexuals and deeply impairs their dignity.
93. We may also refer to Declaration of Principles of Equality

    issued by the Equal Rights Trust in April, 2008, which can be

    described     as    current     international    understanding      of

    Principles on Equality. This declaration was agreed upon by

    a group of experts at a conference entitled "Principles on

    Equality    and    the   Development      of    Legal   Standard    on

    Equality" held on 3-5 April, 2008 in London. Participants of

    different     backgrounds,        including      academics,     legal

    practitioners, human rights activists from all regions of the

    world took part in the Conference.              The Declaration of

    Principles on Equality reflects a moral and professional

    consensus among human rights and equality experts. The

    declaration    defines    the     terms    'equality'    and   'equal

    treatment' as follows:
"THE RIGHT TO EQUALITY
     The right to equality is the right of all human beings to
     be equal in dignity, to be treated with respect and
     consideration and to participate on an equal basis with
     others in any area of economic, social, political, cultural
     or civil life. All human beings are equal before the law
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                      Page 77 of 105
and have the right to equal protection and benefit of
    the law.
EQUAL TREATMENT

    Equal treatment, as an aspect of equality, is not
    equivalent to identical treatment. To realise full and
    effective equality, it is necessary to treat people
    differently according to their different circumstances, to
    assert their equal worth and to enhance their
    capabilities to participate in society as equals."
Part-II of the Declaration lays down the right to non-

    discrimination. The right to non-discrimination is stated to

    be a free-standing fundamental right, subsumed in the right

    to equality. Discrimination is defined as follows:
"Discrimination must be prohibited where it is on
    grounds of race, colour, ethnicity, descent, sex,
    pregnancy, maternity, civil, family or carer status,
    language, religion or belief, political or other opinion,
    birth, national or social origin, nationality, economic
    status, association with a national minority, sexual
    orientation, gender identity, age, disability, health
    status, genetic or other predisposition toward illness or
    a combination of any of these grounds, or on the basis
    of characteristics associated with any of these grounds.
    (emphasis supplied)

    Discrimination based on any other ground must be
    prohibited where such discrimination (i) causes or
    perpetuates systemic disadvantage; (ii) undermines
    human dignity; or (iii) adversely affects the equal
    enjoyment of a person's rights and freedoms in a
    serious manner that is comparable to discrimination on
    the prohibited grounds stated above.
Discrimination must also be prohibited when it is on the
    ground of the association of a person with other
    persons to whom a prohibited ground applied or the
    perception, whether accurate or otherwise, of a person
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                Page 78 of 105
as having a characteristic associated with a prohibited
     ground.
Discrimination may be direct or indirect.
Direct discrimination occurs when for a reason related
     to one or more prohibited grounds a person or group of
     persons is treated less favourably than another person
     or another group of persons is, has been, or would be
     treated in a comparable situation; or when for a reason
     related to one or more prohibited grounds a person or
     group of persons is subjected to a detriment. Direct
     discrimination    may    be    permitted   only    very
     exceptionally, when it can be justified against strictly
     defined criteria.
Indirect discrimination occurs when a provision,
     criterion or practice would put persons having a status
     or a characteristic associated with one or more
     prohibited grounds at a particular disadvantage
     compared with other persons, unless that provision,
     criterion or practice is objectively justified by a
     legitimate aim, and the means of achieving that aim
     are appropriate and necessary.
Harassment constitutes discrimination when unwanted
     conduct related to any prohibited ground takes place
     with the purpose or effect of violating the dignity of a
     person or of creating an intimidating, hostile,
     degrading, humiliating or offensive environment.
     (emphasis supplied)

    [Declaration of Principles on Equality 2008 - The Equal
    Rights Trust]




    SECTION 377
IPC
TARGETS HOMOSEXUALS AS A CLASS
94.
Section 377
IPC is facially neutral and it apparently targets

    not identities but acts, but in its operation it does end up

    unfairly targeting a particular community.     The fact is that
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                 Page 79 of 105
these sexual acts which are criminalised are associated more

    closely with one class of persons, namely, the homosexuals

    as a class.
Section 377
IPC has the effect of viewing all gay

    men as criminals.         When everything associated           with

    homosexuality is treated as bent, queer, repugnant, the

    whole gay and lesbian community is marked with deviance

    and perversity.     They are subject to extensive prejudice

    because what they are or what they are perceived to be, not

    because of what they do.       The result is that a significant

    group of the population is, because of its sexual non-

    conformity, persecuted, marginalised and turned in on itself.

    [Sachs, J. in The National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian

    Equality v. The Minister of Justice, para 108].
95. As Justice O'Connor succinctly stated in her concurring

    opinion in Lawrence v. Texas (supra):
"While it is true that the law applies only to
       conduct, the conduct targeted by this law is
       conduct that is closely correlated with being
       homosexual. Under such circumstances, Texas's
       sodomy law is targeted at more than conduct. It
       is instead directed towards gay persons as a
       class." [page 583]
96. In Romer v. Evans, 517 U.S. 620 (1996), the challenge was

    to an amendment to Colorado's Constitution which named as

    a solitary class persons who were homosexuals, lesbians, or

    bisexual   either   by   "orientation,   conduct,   practices    or

    relationships" and deprived them of protection under the

    state anti-discrimination    laws. The US Supreme Court
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                  Page 80 of 105
concluded that the provision was "born of animosity towards

    the class of persons affected" and further that it had no

    rational relation to a legitimate governmental purpose.

    Justice Kennedy speaking for the majority observed:
"It is not within our constitutional tradition to
       enact laws of this sort. Central both to the idea of
       the rule of law and to our own Constitution's
       guarantee of equal protection is the principle that
       government and each of its parts remain open on
       impartial terms to all who seek its assistance.
       "Equal protection of the laws is not achieved
       through indiscriminate imposition of inequalities".
Sweatt v. Painter, 339 U.S. 629, 635 (1950)
       (quoting Shelley v. Kraemer, 334, U.
S. 1
,
22
       (1948)
. Respect for this principle explains why
       laws singling out a certain class of citizens for
       disfavoured legal status or general hardships are
       rare. A law declaring that in general it shall be
       more difficult for one group of citizens than for all
       others to seek aid from the government is itself a
       denial of equal protection of the laws in the most
       literal sense. "The guaranty of equal protection of
       the laws is a pledge of the protection of equal
       laws...." [Page 633]
       "A second and related point is that laws of the
       kind now before us raise the inevitable inference
       that the disadvantage imposed is born of
       animosity towards the class of persons affected.
"[I]f the constitutional conception of 'equal
       protection of the laws' means anything, it must
       at the very least mean that a bare.....desire to
       harm a politically unpopular group cannot
       constitute a legitimate governmental interest...."
[Page 634].
97. The Supreme Court of Canada in Vriend v. Alberta, (1998)

    1 S.C.R. 493, held:
"Perhaps most important is the psychological
       harm which may ensue from this state of affairs.
       Fear of discrimination will logically lead to
       concealment of true identity and this must be
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                 Page 81 of 105
harmful to personal confidence and self-esteem.
        Compounding that effect is the implicit message
        conveyed by the exclusion, that gays and
        lesbians, unlike other individuals, are not worthy
        of protection. This is clearly an example of a
        distinction which demeans the individual and
        strengthens and perpetrates [sic] the view that
        gays and lesbians are less worthy of protection as
        individuals in Canada's society. The potential
        harm to the dignity and perceived worth of gay
        and lesbian individuals constitutes a particularly
        cruel form of discrimination."[para 102]


    These     observations   were    made    in   the   context    of

    discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation in the

    employment field and would apply with even greater force to

    the criminalisation of consensual sex in private between

    adult males.
98. The inevitable conclusion is that the discrimination caused to

    MSM and gay community is unfair and unreasonable and,

    therefore, in breach of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India.
INFRINGEMENT OF
ARTICLE 15 -
WHETHER 'SEXUAL
    ORIENTATION' IS A GROUND ANALOGOUS TO 'SEX'
99.
Article 15
is an instance and particular application of the

    right of equality which is generally stated in
Article 14.
Article 14
is genus while
Article 15
along with
Article 16
are

    species although all of them occupy same field and the

    doctrine of "equality" embodied in these Articles has many

    facets.
Article 15
prohibits discrimination on several

    enumerated grounds, which include 'sex'. The argument of

    the petitioner is that 'sex' in
Article 15(1)
must be read

    expansively to include a prohibition of discrimination on the
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                  Page 82 of 105
ground of sexual orientation as the prohibited ground of sex-
discrimination cannot be read as applying to gender

    simpliciter.   The purpose underlying the fundamental right

    against sex discrimination is to prevent behaviour that treats

    people differently for reason of not being in conformity with

    generalization concerning "normal" or "natural" gender

    roles.   Discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is

    itself   grounded     in    stereotypical    judgments       and

    generalization about the conduct of either sex. This is stated

    to be the legal position in International Law and comparative

    jurisprudence. Reliance was placed on judgments of Human

    Rights Committee and also on the judgments of Canadian

    and South African courts.
100. International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)

    recognises the right to equality and states that, "the law

    shall prohibit any discrimination on any ground such as race,

    colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion,

    national or social region, property, birth or other status". In

    Toonen v. Australia (supra), the Human Rights Committee,

    while holding that certain provisions of the Tasmanian

    Criminal Code which criminalise various forms of sexual

    conduct between men violated the ICCPR, observed that the

    reference to 'sex' in
Article 2
, paragraphs 1 and 26 (of the

    ICCPR) is to be taken as including 'sexual orientation'.
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                Page 83 of 105
101. Despite the fact that
Section 15(1)
of the Canadian Charter

    does not expressly include sexual orientation as a prohibited

    ground of discrimination, the Canadian Supreme Court has

    held that sexual orientation is a ground analogous to those

    listed in
Section 15(1)
:
"In Egan, it was held, on the basis of "historical,
       social, political and economic disadvantage
       suffered by homosexuals" and the emerging
       consensus among legislatures (at para 176), as
       well as previous judicial decisions (at para 177),
       that sexual orientation is a ground analogous to
       those listed in
s.15(1)
. [Vriend v. Alberta (supra)
       per Cory J. para 90].
102. Similarly, in Corbiere v. Canada, [1999] 2 S.C.R. 203, the

    Canadian Supreme Court identified the thread running

    through these analogous grounds - "what these grounds

    have in common is the fact that they often serve as the

    basis for stereotypical decisions made not on the basis of

    merit but on the basis of a personal characteristic that is

    immutable or changeable only at unacceptable cost to

    personal identity." [para 13].
103. The   South   African     Constitutional   Court   recognised   in

    Prinsloo v. Van Der Linde, 1997 (3) SA 1012 (CC) that

    discrimination on unspecified grounds is usually 'based on

    attributes and characteristics' attaching to people, thereby

    impairing their 'fundamental dignity as human beings'". In

    Harksen v. Lane, 1998 (1) SA 300 (CC), the Court further

    developed the idea to say that there will be discrimination

    on an unspecified ground if it is based on attributes or
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                   Page 84 of 105
characteristics which have the potential to impair the

    fundamental dignity of persons as human beings, or to affect

    them     adversely      in   a     comparably   serious   manner.

    Elaborating on what it means by potential impairment of

    dignity, the Court resisted the temptation of laying down any

    such 'test' for discerning 'unspecified' grounds, but has this

    to say by way of guidelines, "In some cases they relate to

    immutable biological attributes or characteristics, in some to

    the associational life of humans, in some to the intellectual,

    expressive and religious dimensions of humanity and in

    some cases to a combination of one or more of these

    features". It needs to be noted that on account of the

    prevalent wider knowledge of the discrimination on account

    of sexual orientation, the South African constitution, when it

    was drafted, specifically included that as a ground.
104. We hold that sexual orientation is a ground analogous to sex

    and that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is

    not    permitted   by
Article    15.
Further,
Article   15(2)
incorporates the notion of horizontal application of rights. In

    other words, it even prohibits discrimination of one citizen by

    another in matters of access to public spaces. In our view,

    discrimination on the ground of sexual orientation is

    impermissible even on the horizontal application of the right

    enshrined under
Article 15.
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                    Page 85 of 105
"STRICT SCRUTINY" AND "PROPORTIONALITY REVIEW" -
    ANALYSIS OF ANUJ GARG V. HOTEL ASSOCIATION OF INDIA,
    (2008) 3 SCC 1
105. We may now examine in some detail the recent decision of

    the Supreme Court in
Anuj Garg v. Hotel Association of

    India
, (2008) 3 SCC 1, which has important bearing on the

    present case.     In Anuj Garg, constitutional validity of
Section 30
of the Punjab Excise Act, 1914 prohibiting

    employment of "any man under the age of 25 years" or "any

    woman" in any part of such premises in which liquor or

    intoxicating drug is consumed by the public was challenged

    before the High Court of Delhi.     The High Court declared
Section 30
of the Act as ultra vires
Articles 19(1)(g)
, 14
and
15
of the Constitution of India to the extent it prohibits

    employment of any woman in any part of such premises, in

    which liquor or intoxicating drugs are consumed by the

    public. National Capital Territory of Delhi accepted
the said

    judgment
but an appeal was filed by few citizens of Delhi.
The appeal was ultimately dismissed by the Supreme Court,

    but the principles
laid down by
the Court relating to the

    scope of the right to equality enunciated in
Articles 14
and
15
are material for the purpose of the present case. At the

    outset, the Court observed that the Act in question is a pre-

    constitutional legislation and although it is saved in terms of
Article 372
of the Constitution, challenge to its validity on

    the touchstone of
Articles 14
, 15
and
19
of the Constitution

    of India, is permissible in law. There is thus no presumption
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                Page 86 of 105
of constitutionality of a colonial legislation.         Therefore,

    though the statute could have been held to be a valid piece

    of legislation keeping in view the societal condition of those

    times, but with the changes occurring therein both in the

    domestic as also international arena, such a law can also be

    declared invalid.
In this connection, the Court referred to the

    following observations made in
John Vallamattom v.

    Union of India
, (2003) 6 SCC 611:
"The constitutionality of a provision, it is trite, will
        have to be judged keeping in view the
        interpretative changes of the statute affected by
        passage of time.......the law although may be
        constitutional when enacted but with passage of
        time the same may be held to be unconstitutional
        in view of the changed situation." [paras 28 & 33
        of SCC]
106. The
Court further held
that when the validity of a legislation

    is tested on the anvil of equality clauses contained in
Articles

    14
and
15
, the burden therefor would be on the State.
"When the original Act was enacted, the concept
        of equality between two sexes was unknown. The
        makers of the Constitution intended to apply
        equality amongst men and women in all spheres
        of life. In framing
Articles 14
and
15
of the
        Constitution, the constitutional goal in that behalf
        was sought to be achieved. Although the same
        would not mean that under no circumstance,
        classification, inter alia, on the ground of sex
        would be wholly impermissible but it is trite that
        when the validity of a legislation is tested on the
        anvil of equality clauses contained in
Articles 14
and
15
, the burden therefor would be on the
        State. While considering validity of a legislation of
        this nature, the court was to take notice of the
        other provisions of the Constitution including
        those contained in Part IV- A of the Constitution."
[para 21of SCC].
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                   Page 87 of 105
107. The Court discussed two distinct concepts - "strict scrutiny"
borrowed from the US jurisprudence, and "proportionality

    review" which has its origin in the jurisprudence of Canadian

    and European courts. The Court held that the interference

    prescribed by the State for pursuing the ends of protection

    should be proportionate to the legitimate aims. The standard

    for judging the proportionality should be a standard capable

    of being called reasonable in a modern democratic society.
The
Court further held
that legislations with pronounced

    "protective   discrimination"   aims,   such    as
Section   30
,

    potentially serve as double edged swords.            Strict scrutiny

    should be employed while assessing the implications of this

    variety of legislations.    Legislation should not be only

    assessed on its proposed aims but rather on the implications

    and the effects.    The Court then went on to state the

    principle of personal autonomy with a special judicial role

    when dealing with laws reflecting oppressive cultural norms

    that especially target minorities and vulnerable groups.
".....the issue of biological difference between
      sexes gathers an overtone of societal conditions so
      much so that the real differences are pronounced
      by the oppressive cultural norms of the time. This
      combination of biological and social determinants
      may find expression in popular legislative
      mandate.      Such legislations definitely deserve
      deeper judicial scrutiny. It is for the court to
      review that the majoritarian impulses rooted in
      moralistic tradition do not impinge upon individual
      autonomy. This is the backdrop of deeper judicial
      scrutiny of such legislations world over." [para 41
      of SCC]
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                   Page 88 of 105
108. The     Court   held   that
Article   15
's   prohibition   of   sex

    discrimination implies the right to autonomy and self-

    determination, which places emphasis on individual choice.

    Therefore, a measure that disadvantages a vulnerable group

    defined on the basis of a characteristic that relates to

    personal autonomy must be subject to strict scrutiny.
"46. ....The impugned legislation suffers from
       incurable fixations of stereotype morality and
       conception of sexual role. The perspective thus
       arrived at is outmoded in content and stifling in
       means.
47. No law in its ultimate effect should end up
       perpetuating the oppression of women. Personal
       freedom is a fundamental tenet which cannot be
       compromised in the name of expediency until and
       unless there is a compelling state purpose.
       Heightened level of scrutiny is the normative
       threshold for judicial review in such cases.
       ......
......
......
50. The test to review such a Protective
       Discrimination statute would entail a two-pronged
       scrutiny:
(a) the legislative interference (induced by sex
           discriminatory legislation in the instant case)
           should be justified in principle,
(b) the same should be proportionate in measure.
51. The Court's task is to determine whether the
       measures furthered by the State in form of
       legislative mandate, to augment the legitimate
       aim of protecting the interests of women are
       proportionate to the other bulk of well-settled
       gender norms such as autonomy, equality of
       opportunity, right to privacy et al. The bottom line
       in this behalf would be a functioning modern
       democratic society which ensures freedom to
       pursue varied opportunities and options without
       discriminating on the basis of sex, race, caste or
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                      Page 89 of 105
any other like basis. In fine, there should be a
       reasonable      relationship  of   proportionality
       between the means used and the aim pursued."
       (emphasis supplied)
109. In Anuj Garg, the Court, however, clarified that the

    heightened review standard does not make sex a proscribed

    classification,    "...sex   classifications"   may   be   used   to

    compensate women "for particular economic disabilities

    (they have) suffered", "to promote equal employment

    opportunity", to advance full development of the talent and

    capacities of our nation's people. Such classifications may

    not be used, as they once were, to create or perpetuate the

    legal, social, and economic inferiority of women."
110.
In
Ashok Kumar Thakur v. Union of India
, (2008) 6 SCC

    1, the Supreme Court refused to apply strict scrutiny to an

    affirmative action measure.            The Court held that the

    principles
laid down by
the United States Supreme Court

    such as 'suspect legislation', 'strict scrutiny' and 'compelling

    state necessity' are not applicable for challenging the

    validity   of     reservations    or   other    affirmative   action

    contemplated under
Article 15(5)
of the Constitution. [per

    Balakrishnan, C.J., Summary point 9 : page 526 of SCC]
111. On a harmonious construction of the two judgments, the

    Supreme Court must be interpreted to have laid down that

    the principle of 'strict scrutiny' would not apply to affirmative

    action under
Article 15(5)
but a measure that disadvantages
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                     Page 90 of 105
a vulnerable group defined on the basis of a characteristic

    that relates to personal autonomy must be subject to strict

    scrutiny.
112. Thus   personal   autonomy    is   inherent   in   the   grounds

    mentioned in
Article 15.
The grounds that are not specified

    in
Article 15
but are analogous to those specified therein, will

    be those which have the potential to impair the personal

    autonomy of an individual. This view was earlier indicated in
Indra Sawhney v. Union of India
, (1992) Supp.
3 SCC
217. In Anuj Garg, S.B. Sinha, J. emphasised this aspect

    with great clarity:
".....The bottom line in this behalf would be a
        functioning modern democratic society which
        ensures freedom to pursue varied opportunities
        and options without discriminating on the basis of
        sex, race, caste or any other like basis...."
(emphasis supplied) [para 51 of SCC]
113. As held in Anuj Garg, if a law discriminates on any of the

    prohibited grounds, it needs to be tested not merely against

    "reasonableness" under
Article 14
but be subject to "strict

    scrutiny".   The impugned provision in
Section 377
IPC

    criminalises the acts of sexual minorities particularly men

    who have sex with men and gay men. It disproportionately

    impacts them solely on the basis of their sexual orientation.

    The provision runs counter to the constitutional values and

    the notion of human dignity which is considered to be the

    cornerstone of our Constitution.
Section 377
IPC in its

    application to sexual acts of consenting adults in privacy
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                   Page 91 of 105
discriminates a section of people solely on the ground of

     their sexual orientation which is analogous to prohibited

     ground of sex. A provision of law branding one section of

     people as criminal based wholly on the State's moral

     disapproval of that class goes counter to the equality

     guaranteed under
Articles 14
and
15
under any standard of

     review.
114. A constitutional provision must be construed, not in a narrow

     and constricted sense, but in a wide and liberal manner so

     as to anticipate and take account of changing conditions and

     purposes so that the constitutional provision does not get

     atrophied or fossilized but remains flexible enough to meet

     the newly emerging problems. [
Francis Coralie Mullin v.

     Union Territory of Delhi
(supra), para 6 of SCC].
In
M.

     Nagraj    v.   Union   of   India
,   (2006)   8   SCC   212,the

     Constitution Bench noted that:
"Constitution is not an ephemeral legal document
         embodying a set of legal rules for the passing
         hour. It sets out principles for an expanding
         future and is intended to endure for ages to come
         and consequently to be adapted to the various
         crisis of human affairs. Therefore, a purposive
         rather than a strict literal approach to the
         interpretation should be adopted. A Constitutional
         provision must be construed not in a narrow and
         constricted sense but in a wide and liberal
         manner so as to anticipate and take account of
         changing conditions and purposes so that
         constitutional provision does not get fossilized but
         remains flexible enough to meet the newly
         emerging problems and challenges".[para 19 of
         SCC]
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                   Page 92 of 105
115. Similar is the sentiment expressed by Kennedy, J. in

    Lawrence v. Texas (supra):
"Had those who drew and ratified the Due Process
        Clauses of the Fifth Amendment or the Fourteenth
        Amendment known the components of liberty in
        its manifold possibilities, they might have been
        more specific. They did not presume to have this
        insight. They know times can blind us to certain
        truths and later generations can see that laws
        once thought necessary and proper in fact serve
        only to oppress. As the Constitution endures,
        persons in every generation can invoke its
        principles in their own search for greater
        freedom". [at page 563]


    SCOPE OF THE COURT'S POWER TO DECLARE A
    STATUTORY PROVISION INVALID
116. Learned ASG strenuously contended that the Judges must

    maintain judicial self-restraint while exercising the power of

    judicial review of legislation. There is a broad separation of

    powers under the Constitution, and the three organs of the

    State - the legislature, the executive and the judiciary, must

    respect each other and must not ordinarily encroach into

    each others' domain.     The legislature is a democratically

    elected body which expresses the will of the people, and in a

    democracy, this will is not to be lightly frustrated or

    obstructed. The Court should, therefore, ordinarily defer to

    the decision of the legislature as it is the best judge of what

    is good for the community. He placed reliance on a recent

    judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of
Government

    of Andhra Pradesh v. P. Laxmi Devi
, (2008) 4 SCC 720,

    where the Court after referring to the classic essay of
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                Page 93 of 105
Professor James Bradley Thayer entitled "The Origin and

    Scope of the American Doctrine of Constitutional Law" and

    certain observations of Justice Felix Frankfurter, held as

    follows:
"46. In our opinion, there is one and only one
        ground for declaring an Act of the legislature (or a
        provision in the Act) to be invalid, and that is if it
        clearly violates some provision of the Constitution
        in so evident a manner as to leave no manner of
        doubt.      This violation can, of course, be in
        different ways, e.g. if a State legislature makes a
        law which only the Parliamnet can make under
        List I to the Seventh Schedule, in which case it will
        violate
Article 246(1)
of the Constitution, or the
        law violates some specific provision of the
        Constitution (other than the directive principles).
        But before declaring the statute to be
        unconstitutional, the Court must be absolutely
        sure that there can be no manner of doubt that it
        violates a provision of the Constitution. If two
        views are possible, one making the statute
        constitutional    and     the  other     making     it
        unconstitutional, the former view must always be
        preferred. Also, the Court must make every effort
        to uphold the constitutional validity of a statute,
        even if that requries giving a strained
        construction or narrowing down its scope vide
Mark Netto v. State of Kerala and Ors.
(1979) 1
        SCC 23, para 6 of SCC. Also, it is none of the
        concern of the Court whether the legislation in its
        opinion is wise or unwise.
.......
.......
50. In our opinion judges must maintain judicial
        self-restraint while exercising the power of judicial
        review of legislation....
51. In our opinion the legislature must be given
        freedom to do expermientations in exercising its
        powers, provided of course it does not clearly and
        flagrantly violate its constitutional limits.
        .......
.......
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                 Page 94 of 105
57. In our opinion, the court should, therefore,
        ordinarily defer to the wisdom of the legislature
        unless it enacts a law about which there can be
        no manner of doubt about its unconstitutionality."
117. The learned ASG also referred to the locus classicus

    judgment of the Supreme Court in
State of Madras v.

    V.G. Row
, AIR 1952 SC 196, wherein para 15 dealing with

    test of reasonableness reads as follows:
"15. ... It is important in this context to bear in
        mind that the test of reasonableness, wherever
        prescribed, should be applied to each individual
        statute impugned, and no abstract standard, or
        general pattern of reasonableness can be laid
        down as applicable to all cases. The nature of the
        right alleged to have been infringed, the
        underlying purpose of the restrictions imposed, the
        extent and urgency of the evil sought to be
        remedied thereby, the disproportion of the
        imposition, the prevailing conditions at the time,
        should all enter into the judicial verdict. In
        evaluating such elusive factors and forming their
        own conception of what is reasonable, in all the
        circumstances of a given case, it is inevitable that
        the social philosophy and the scale of values of the
        Judges participating in the decision should play an
        important part, and the limit to their interference
        with legislative judgment in such cases can only be
        dictated by their sense of responsibility and self-
        restraint and the sobering reflection that the
        Constitution is meant not only for people of their
        way of thinking but for all, and that the majority of
        the elected representatives of the people have, in
        authorising the imposition of the restrictions,
        considered them to be reasonable."
118. It is true that the courts should ordinarily defer to the

    wisdom of the legislature while exercising the power of

    judicial review of legislation.   But it is equally well settled

    that the degree of deference to be given to the legislature is

    dependent on the subject matter under consideration.
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                 Page 95 of 105
When matters of "high constitutional importance" such as

    constitutionally entranched human rights - are under

    consideration, the courts are obliged in discharging their

    own     sovereign   jurisdiction,   to   give   considerably     less

    deference to the legislature than would otherwise be the

    case.
In
State of Madras v. V.G.Row
(supra), while

    impliedly explicating the scope of power under
Article 13
it

    was held that if the legislation in question violated a

    fundamental right, it would have to be struck down "in

    discharge of a duty plainly laid upon the courts by the

    Constitution" [para 13 of AIR].
119.
In
R. (Alconbury Ltd.) v. Environment Secretary
, [2001]

    2 WLR 1389, Lord Hoffmann spoke of the approach in such

    cases:
"There is no conflict between human rights and
        the democratic principle. Respect for human
        rights requires that certain basic rights of
        individuals should not be capable in any
        circumstances of being overridden by the
        majority, even if they think that the public
        interest so requires. Other rights should be
        capable of being overridden only in very
        restricted circumstances. These are rights which
        belong to individuals simply by virtue of their
        humanity, independently of any utilitarian
        calculation. The protection of these basic rights
        from majority decision requires that independent
        and impartial tribunals should have the power to
        decide whether legislation infringes them and
        either (as in the United States) to declare such
        legislation invalid or (as in the United Kingdom) to
        declare that it is incompatible with the governing
        human rights instrument. But outside these basic
        rights, there are many decisions which have to be
        made every day (for example, about the
        allocation of resources) in which the only fair
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                    Page 96 of 105
method of decision is by some person or body
         accountable to the electorate. [
R. (Alconbury Ltd.)
         v. Environment Secretary
[2001] 2 WLR 1389, at
         1411]"
120. In this regard, the role of the judiciary can be described as

    one of protecting the counter majoritarian safeguards

    enumerated in the Constitution.       It is apt to refer to the

    observations of Justice Robert Jackson in West Virginia

    State Board of Education v. Barnette, 319 US 624

    (1943):
"The very purpose of the bill of rights was to
         withdraw certain subjects from the vicissitudes of
         political controversy, to place them beyond the
         reach of majorities and officials and to establish
         them as legal principles to be applied by the
         Courts. One's right to life, liberty, and property, to
         free speech, a free press, freedom of worship and
         assembly, and other fundamental rights may not
         be submitted to vote: they depend on the outcome
         of no elections." [page 638]
121. We may also refer to the two recent decisions of the

    Supreme Court involving the power of the courts to review

    Parliament's legislative and non-legislative functions - i.e.

    the judgments in
I.R. Coelho (Dead) by LRs v. State of

    Tamil Nadu & Ors.
, (2007) 2 SCC 1 and Raja Ram Pal v.

    Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha & Ors., (2007) 3 SCC 184.

    In Coelho, the Supreme Court held that it could strike down

    any law inserted into the Ninth Schedule if it were contrary

    to Constitutional provisions. It was observed:
"....the jurisprudence and development around
        fundamental rights has made it clear that they are
        not limited, narrow rights but provide a broad
        check against the violations or excesses by the
        State authorities. The fundamental rights have in
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                 Page 97 of 105
fact   proved     to   be   the most       significant
         constitutional    control  on     the    Government,
         particularly legislative power......It cannot be said
         that the same Constitution that provides for a
         check on legislative power, will decide whether
         such a check is necessary or not. It would be a
         negation of the Constitution." [paras 56 & 102]
122.
In
Raja Ram Pal
case, the Court disposed of the arguments

     regarding   the   unconstitutionality   of   the   expulsion   of

     Members of Parliament while simultaneously upholding the

     principles of judicial review.   The Court began by stating

     that the Constitution was the "supreme lex in this country"
and went on to say that:
"Parliament indeed is a coordinate organ and its
         views do deserve deference even while its acts
         are    amenable       to   judicial   scrutiny.....mere
         coordinate      constitutional    status....does    not
         disentitle this Court from exercising its jurisdiction
         of judicial review...." [paras 391 and 431 of SCC]
123. In the present case, the two constitutional rights relied upon

     i.e. 'right to personal liberty' and 'right to equality' are

     fundamental human rights which belong to individuals

     simply by virtue of their humanity, independent of any

     utilitarian consideration.   A Bill of Rights does not 'confer'

     fundamental human rights. It confirms their existence and

     accords them protection.
124. In Peerless General Finance Investment Co. Ltd. v.
Reserve Bank of India, (1992) 2 SCC 343, the Court

     highlighted the role of the judiciary as protector of

     fundamental rights in following words:
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                  Page 98 of 105
"Wherever a statute is challenged as violative of
        the fundamental rights, its real effect or
        operation on the fundamental rights is of primary
        importance. It is the duty of the court to be
        watchful to protect the constitutional rights of a
        citizen as against any encroachment gradually or
        stealthily thereon. When a law has imposed
        restrictions on the fundamental rights, what the
        court has to examine is the substance of the
        legislation without being beguiled by the mere
        appearance of the legislation. The Legislature
        cannot disobey the constitutional mandate by
        employing an indirect method. The court must
        consider not merely the purpose of the law but
        also the means how it is sought to be secured or
        how it is to be administered. The object of the
        legislation is not conclusive as to the validity of
        the legislation...... The court must lift the veil of
        the form and appearance to discover the true
        character and the nature of the legislation, and
        every endeavour should be made to have the
        efficacy of fundamental right maintained and the
        legislature is not invested with unbounded
        power. The court has, therefore, always to guard
        against the gradual encroachments and strike
        down a restriction as soon as it reaches that
        magnitude of total annihilation of the right."
[para 48 of SCC]
125. After the conclusion of oral hearing, learned ASG filed his

    written submissions in which he claimed that the courts

    have only to interpret the law as it is and have no power to

    declare the law invalid. According to him, therefore, if we

    were to agree with the petitioner, we could only make

    recommendation to Parliament and it is for Parliament to

    amend the law.     We are constrained to observe that the

    submission of learned ASG reflects rather poorly on his

    understanding of the constitutional scheme.             It is a

    fundamental principle of our constitutional scheme that

    every organ of the State, every authority under the

    Constitution derives its power or authority under the
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                 Page 99 of 105
Constitution and has to act within the limits of powers. The

    judiciary is constituted as the ultimate interpreter of the

    Constitution and to it is assigned the delicate task of

    determining what is the extent and scope of the power

    conferred on each branch of government, what are the

    limits on the exercise of such power under the Constitution

    and whether any action of any branch transgresses such

    limits. The role of the judiciary is to protect the fundamental

    rights. A modern democracy while based on the principle of

    majority rule implicitly recognizes the need to protect the

    fundamental rights of those who may dissent or deviate

    from the majoritarian view.
It is the job of the judiciary to

    balance the principles ensuring that the government on the

    basis of number does not override fundamental rights. After

    the enunciation of the basic structure doctrine, full judicial

    review is an integral part of the constitutional scheme. To

    quote the words of Krishna Iyer, J. "... The compulsion of

    constitutional humanism and the assumption of full faith in

    life and liberty cannot be so futile or fragmentary that any

    transient legislative majority in tantrums against any

    minority by three quick readings of a Bill with the requisite

    quorum, can prescribe any unreasonable modality and

    thereby sterilise the grandiloquent mandate." [
Maneka

    Gandhi v. Union of India
(supra), para 81 of SCC].
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                Page 100 of 105
INFRINGEMENT OF ARTCILE 19(1)(a) to (d)
126. In the light of our findings on the infringement of
Articles 21
,

     14
and
15
, we feel it unnecessary to deal with the issue of

     violation of
Article 19(1)(a)
to (d). This issue is left open.


    DOCTRINE OF SEVERABILITY
127. The prayer of the petitioner is to declare
Section 377
IPC as

     unconstitutional to the extent the said provision affects

     private sexual acts between consenting adults in private.

     The relief has been sought in this manner to ensure the

     continuance of applicability of
Section 377
IPC to cases

     involving non-consensual sex. Our attention was drawn to a

     passage from Constitutional Law of India (Fourth Edition,

     Vol. 1) by H.M. Seervai, wherein the learned author has

     explained the Doctrine of Severability in the following words:
"3.7 Severability we have seen that where two
         interpretations are possible, a Court will accept
         that interpretation which will uphold the validity
         of law.    If, however, this is not possible, it
         becomes necessary to decide whether the law is
         bad as a whole, or whether the bad part can be
         severed from the good part. The question of
         construction, and the question of severability are
         thus two distinct questions"
....
3.9 There are two kinds of severability : a
         statutory provision may contain distinct and
         separate words dealing with distinct and separate
         topics, as for example, one sub-section may apply
         it retrospectively. The first sub-section may be
         valid and the second void. In such a case, the
         Court may delete the second sub-section by
         treating it as severable.
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                    Page 101 of 105
3.10 There     is   however     another   kind   of
        severability namely severability in application, or
        severability in enforcement. The question of this
        other kind of severability arises when an
        impugned provision is one indivisible whole, as for
        instance, the definition of a word.            Here
        severability cannot be applied by deleting an
        offending provision and leaving the rest standing.
        It becomes necessary therefore to enquire
        whether the impugned definition embraces
        distinct classes and categories of subject matter
        in respect to some of which the Legislature has no
        power to legislate or is otherwise subject to a
        Constitutional limit.    If it is found that the
        definition does cover distinct and separate classes
        and categories, the Court will restrain the
        enforcement of the law in respect of that class of
        subjects in respect of which the law is invalid.
        This might be done by granting perpetual
        injunction restraining the enforcement of law on
        the      forbidden     field,     as    held     in
        Chamarbaughwalla's Case (1957) S.C.R. 930.
        3.11 The principle of severability in application
        was first adopted by our Sup. Ct. when dealing
        with the contention that a tax law must be
        declared wholly void if it was bad in part as
        transgressing Constitutional limitations.      Sastri
        C.J., delivering the majority judgment, observed:
"It is a sound rule to extend severability to
        include separability in enforcement....and we are
        of the opinion that the principle should be applied
        in dealing with taxing statutes.....". He referred to
        the decision in Bowman v. Continental Oil Co.,
        (1920) 256 US 642. In Chamarbaughwalla's case,
        it was argued that this rule was exceptional and
        applied only to taxing statutes. But Venkatarama
        Aiyar J. rejected this contention."
128.
In
R.M.D. Chamarbaugwalla v. Union of India
, AIR 1957

    SC 628, the Constitution Bench laid down:
"When a legislature whose authority, is subject to
        limitations aforesaid enacts a law which is wholly
        in excess of its powers, it is entirely void and
        must be completely ignored. But where the
        legislation falls in part within the area allotted to
        it and in part outside it, it is undoubtedly void as
        to the latter; but does it on that account become
        necessarily void in its entirety? The answer to this
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                Page 102 of 105
question must depend on whether what is valid
          could be separated from what is invalid, and that
          is a question which has to be decided by the
          Court on a consideration of the provisions of the
          Act. This is a principle well established in
          American       Jurisprudence,     Vide   Cooley's
          Constitutional Limitations, Vol. I, Chap. VII,
          Crawford on Statutory Construction, Chap. 16 and
          Sutherland on Statutory Construction, 3rd Edn.,
          Vol. 2, Chap. 24." [para 12 of AIR]


    In that case, the Court accepted the contention of the

    respondent that the principle of severability is applicable

    when a statute is partially void for whatever reason that

    might be, and that the impugned provisions are severable

    and, therefore, enforceable as against competitions which

    are     of   a   gambling    character.      The    ratio    in

    Chamarbaugwalla was followed in Kedar Nath v. State

    of Bihar, AIR 1962 SC 955, Bhim Singhji v. Union of

    India, (1981) 1 SCC 166 and State of Andhra Pradesh v.
National Thermal Power Corporation, (2002) 5 SCC 203.
CONCLUSION
129. The notion of equality in the Indian Constitution flows from

    the 'Objective Resolution' moved by Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru

    on December 13, 1946. Nehru, in his speech, moving this

    Resolution wished that the House should consider the

    Resolution not in a spirit of narrow legal wording, but rather

    look at the spirit behind that Resolution. He said, "Words are

    magic things often enough, but even the magic of words
[WP(C)7455/2001]                               Page 103 of 105
sometimes cannot convey the magic of the human spirit and

    of a Nation's passion........ (The Resolution) seeks very

    feebly to tell the world of what we have thought or dreamt

    of so long, and what we now hope to achieve in the near

    future."   [Constituent   Assembly     Debates:      Lok   Sabha

    Secretariat, New Delhi: 1999, Vol. I, pages 57-65].
130. If there is one constitutional tenet that can be said to be

    underlying theme of the Indian Constitution, it is that of

    'inclusiveness'. This Court believes that Indian Constitution

    reflects this value deeply ingrained in Indian society,

    nurtured over several generations. The inclusiveness that

    Indian society traditionally displayed, literally in every

    aspect of life, is manifest in recognising a role in society for

    everyone. Those perceived by the majority as "deviants' or

    'different' are not on that score excluded or ostracised.
131. Where society can display inclusiveness and understanding,

    such persons can be assured of a life of dignity and non-

    discrimination. This was the 'spirit behind the Resolution' of

    which Nehru spoke so passionately. In our view, Indian

    Constitutional law does not permit the statutory criminal law

    to be held captive by the popular misconceptions of who the

    LGBTs are. It cannot be forgotten that discrimination is anti-

    thesis of equality and that it is the recognition of equality

    which will foster the dignity of every individual.
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                 Page 104 of 105
132. We declare that
Section 377
IPC, insofar it criminalises

     consensual sexual acts of adults in private, is violative of
Articles 21
, 14
and
15
of the Constitution. The provisions of
Section 377
IPC will continue to govern non-consensual

     penile non-vaginal sex and penile non-vaginal sex involving

     minors. By 'adult' we mean everyone who is 18 years of age

     and above. A person below 18 would be presumed not to be

     able to consent to a sexual act. This clarification will hold till,

     of course, Parliament chooses to amend the law to

     effectuate the recommendation of the Law Commission of

     India in its 172nd Report which we believe removes a great

     deal of confusion.    Secondly, we clarify that our judgment

     will not result in the re-opening of criminal cases involving
Section 377
IPC that have already attained finality.
We allow the writ petition in the above terms.
CHIEF JUSTICE




JULY 2, 2009                                   S.MURALIDHAR, J
"nm/v/pk"
[WP(C)7455/2001]                                    Page 105 of 105