SOURCE: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/29654720/
SCRAPED: 2026-02-18T10:27:40.634247
TITLE: Full Document
================================================================================

[Cites
46
, Cited by
1
]
Delhi High Court
Arvind Kejriwal vs Arun Jaitley & Ors on 19 October, 2016
Author:
P.S.Teji
Bench:
P.S.Teji
*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+      Crl.M.C. 2417/2016

                                      Date of Decision: October 19th, 2016

       ARVIND KEJRIWAL                                     ..... Petitioner

                           Through:     Mr. Ram Jethmalani, Senior Advocate
                                        with Ms.Nitya Ramakrishnan, Adv.,
                                        Mr. S. Farasat, Adv., Mr.Ashwath
                                        Sitaraman, Adv., Mr.Chirag Madan,
                                        Adv., Mr.Anirudh, Adv. & Mr.Ahmed
                                        Said, Adv.

                           versus

       ARUN JAITLEY & ORS                                  ..... Respondents

                           Through:     Mr.Harish N. Salve, Senior Adv. with
                                        Mr. Siddharth Luthra, Sr. Adv.,
                                        Mr. Manik Dogra, Adv., Mr. Manoj
                                        Taneja, Adv., Mr. Poonam Prasad,
                                        Adv. for respondent No. 1.


               CORAM:
               HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.S.TEJI

       P.S.TEJI, J.
1.      The present petition has been filed by the petitioner, under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter

       shall be referred to as
Cr.P.C
.) read with
Article 227
of the

       Constitution of India for setting aside and quashing of order dated
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                            Page 1 of 30
19.05.2016 passed by the learned Chief Metropolitan Magistrate,

       Patiala House Courts, New Delhi and for stay of the criminal

       proceedings in Criminal Complaint No.210/2016 until the final

       decision of Civil Suit bearing CS(OS) No.3457/2015 pending

       before this Court.
2.      The petitioner is a member and convenor of Aam Aadmi

       Party, member of the Legislative Assembly of Delhi and is the

       current Chief Minister of the NCT of Delhi. The respondent no.1

       was the President of Delhi District and Cricket Association

       (DDCA) until 2013 and is a member of Bhartiya Janta Party,

       Member of Parliament and Union Cabinet Minister.                   On

       21.12.2015, a complaint of criminal defamation was filed by the

       respondent no.1 against the petitioner and respondent nos.2 to 6

       with allegations under
Sections 499
,
500
,
501
,
502
of the IPC read

       with
Section 34
and
35
of the IPC. On the same date, respondent

       no.1 had also filed a civil defamation suit before this Court.

       Learned CMM took cognizance of the offences on 21.12.2015 and

       pre-summoning evidence was recorded.          Vide order dated

       09.03.2016, the petitioner and respondent nos.2 to 6 were
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                         Page 2 of 30
summoned and they appeared before the Court on 07.04.2016.
3.      The matter was fixed for framing of the notice on

       19.05.2016.
4.      On 19.05.2016, an application under
Section 309(2)
of the

       Cr.P.C. was moved by the petitioner with the prayer to stay the

       hearing of the criminal complaint until the proceedings before this

       Court are decided. Vide order dated 19.05.2016, the learned CMM

       observed that no stay of the proceedings can be granted on account

       of pendency of civil suit before this Court. It was opined by the

       Court below that the civil suit and criminal defamation both stand

       on different footing and can be tried simultaneously. Operative

       part of the order reads as under :
"Now, to my mind, there are certain
                     averments made in the application which
                     warrant a reply before disposal of the same.
                     However, in so far as prayer no.1 is
                     concerned [as extracted hereinabove] i.e., as
                     to stay of the proceedings, I may note that
                     this court cannot stay the proceedings on its
                     own/merely on account of pendency of civil
                     suit before Hon'ble Court of Delhi.
In my opinion the civil suit for
                     damages on account of defamation and
                     criminal defamation case both stands on
                     different footing and can be tried
                     simultaneously and there is no impediment
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                           Page 3 of 30
qua proceedings further in the case in hand.
                      The accused persons have been summoned
                      in the present case and as on date, there is no
                      stay whatsoever from any Court of law."
5.      The present petition came up for hearing on 13.07.2016. On

       21.07.2016, reply to the petition was filed by the respondent no.1.

       The learned Senior Counsel for the parties had agreed that the

       question formulated below may be decided by this Court :
"Whether     the   criminal    proceedings        could
                      continue or are required to be stayed during the
                      pendency of the CS(OS) No.3457/2015?"
Arguments were advanced by the learned Senior Counsel for

       the parties.
6.      Feeling aggrieved by the observations made in the order

       dated 19.05.2016, the present petition has been preferred by the

       petitioner mainly on the ground that the criminal proceedings are

       ought to be stayed as the civil suit has been filed on the basis of

       same facts and allegations. Further ground taken is that there are

       similarities in both the proceedings initiated by the respondent no.1

       such as the facts that the parties are same, events are same, date of

       filing is same, cause of action is same and both the proceedings are

       private in character.
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                              Page 4 of 30
7.      Arguments advanced by Mr.Ram Jethmalani, learned Senior

       Counsel for the petitioner and by Mr.Harish Salve, learned Senior

       Counsel assisted by Mr.Sidharth Luthra, learned Senior Counsel

       for the respondent no.1 were heard.
8.      Argument advanced by the learned Senior Counsel Mr.Ram

       Jethmalani for the petitioner is that the civil suit filed by the

       respondent no.1 and the criminal complaint in question are based

       on the same facts and allegations and thus the criminal proceedings

       for defamation may be stayed as per
Section 309(2)
of the Cr.P.C.

       by referring the judgments in the case of M.S. Sheriff, P.C.

       Damodaran Nair v. State of Madras & Ors.
AIR 1954 SC 397,

       P.Jayappan v. S.K. Perumal
AIR 1984 SC 1693, Tula and Ors. v.

       Sadh and Ors.
AIR 1962 HP 28, Radheshyam Kejriwal v. State of

       West Bengal and Anr. (
2011) 3 SCC 581,Dhanrajmal Gobindram

       & Co. Pvt. Ltd. v. The State of Maharashtra & Anr.
1973 Cri.L.J.

       1574, Bhagwandin v. Janak Lal & Anr. 1956
AWR 288, Mausam

       Mia v. Kashim Ali
1963
Cri.L.J. 129, Raj Kumari Debi and Anr.

       v. Bama Sundari Debi
(1896) ILR 23 Cal 610, J.M. Lucas v.

       Official Assignee of Bengal AIR 1920 Cal 624, Kanhaiya Lal v.
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                          Page 5 of 30
Bhagwan Das
AIR 1926 All 30, N.B. Chakkathimma Reddi and

       Anr. v. The State of Mysore
AIR 1952 Mys 37, Nandu Babu v.

       Rajendra Kumar 1970 Cri.L.J. 1574, Satendra Kumar Gupta v.

       A.B. Shorewal 1979
ACR 21, Raminder Kaur Bedi v. Jatinder

       Singh Bedi
1989 (16) DRJ 154, Charanjiv Partap Ahluwalia and

       another v. State (Delhi Admn.)
1997 Cri.L.J. 333, Sunil

       Mehdiratta and ors. v. Union of India ILR (2001) 2 Del 554,

       Madhao Bhagwant Deshmukh v. Emperor
AIR 1926 Nag 315

       and Bhanu M. Vakil v. Chandra Oshiram Keswani & Anr.
1991

       Cri.L.J. 2819.
9.      Learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner further argued that

       if    both    the   proceedings   are   allowed   to   be   continued

       simultaneously, it can cause harassment and embarrassment to the

       accused in the criminal proceedings. It is further submitted that

       this Court is a Court of Record and the findings recorded by this

       Court in the civil suit is binding on criminal court which in the

       present case is subordinate to this Court. It is further submitted

       that in criminal cases the burden of proof is beyond reasonable

       doubt and in case the respondent no.1 loses the civil case, it is
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                             Page 6 of 30
impossible that he will succeed in the criminal case. On this point,

       judgment in the case of Radheshyam Kejriwal (supra) has been

       relied upon in which it has been observed that standard of proof in

       a criminal case is much higher than that of the adjudication

       proceeding. It is further argued that the embarrassment to the

       petitioner is inherent in defending two proceedings simultaneously,

       one that imperils his liberty and the other that has serious financial

       liabilities.
10.     During the course of arguments, learned Senior Counsel for

       the petitioner relied upon the judgment in the case of M.S. Sheriff

       (supra), it was observed that as between the civil and criminal

       proceedings, the criminal matters should be given precedence. No

       hard and fast rule can be laid down but the possibility of

       conflicting decisions in the civil and criminal courts is a relevant

       consideration.   The law envisages such an eventuality when it

       expressly refrains from making the decision of one court being

       binding on the other, or even relevant, except for certain limited

       purposes, such as sentence or damages.           The only relevant

       consideration is the likelihood of embarrassment. A civil suit often
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                             Page 7 of 30
drags on for years and it is undesirable that a criminal prosecution

       should wait till everybody concerned has forgotten all about the

       crime.
11.
In the case of
Mausam Mia
(supra), it was observed that it

       will amount to great embarrassment for the petitioners, if they are

       forced to stand a trial in the Criminal Court on this question first

       and again to have the same matter agitated in the Civil Court.

       There is also the likelihood of the Civil Court and the Criminal

       Court coming to conflicting decisions on the point which will

       greatly prejudice the accused in the case.
In the case of
Raj Kumari Debi
(supra), it was observed that

       if the parties to the two proceedings are substantially the same and

       the prosecution before the Magistrate is but a private prosecution,

       and the issues in the two Courts are substantially identical, that

       both the cases should go on at one and the same time; and that it is

       quite open to the Magistrate to consider whether it is not desirable

       that the proceedings in his Court should be stayed till the decision

       of the civil suit, or for a limited period of time.
In the case of
Raminder Kaur Bedi
(supra), it was observed
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                            Page 8 of 30
by the learned Single Judge of this Court that the criminal trial was

       bound to prejudice the case filed by the respondent seeking divorce

       from the petitioner on the ground of adultery.        It was further

       observed that in case the respondent is to succeed in proving his

       allegations made by him in his divorce case then the same would

       furnish him good defence against the charge of defamation in view

       of the provisions contained in
Section 499
IPC. The learned Single

       Judge stayed the criminal case till disposal of the divorce case.
In the case of Charanjiv Partap Ahluwalia (supra), the

       proceedings before the criminal court were stayed till the disposal

       of the civil suit on the ground that the decision in the civil suit

       would have great bearing on the criminal case as the facts were

       intimately connected and were not different from those alleged or

       pleaded in the civil suit.
In Sunil Mehdiratta's case (supra), it was observed that the

       question whether the adjudication proceedings have any relevance

       or bearing has to be judged by the trial Court dealing with the

       application under
Section 309
of the Code.
In the case of
P. Jayappan
(supra) it was observed that the
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                             Page 9 of 30
criminal court may adjourn or postpone the hearing of a criminal

       case in exercise of its discretionary power under
Section 309
of the

       Cr.P.C. if the disposal of any proceeding under the Act which has a

       bearing on the proceedings before it is imminent so that it may take

       also into consideration the order to be passed therein. There is no

       rigid rule which makes it necessary for a criminal court to adjourn

       or postpone the hearing of a case before it indefinitely or for an

       unduly long period only because some proceeding which may have

       some bearing on it is pending elsewhere.
In the case of J.M. Lucas (supra) in which it was observed

       that though no invariable rule can be laid down, it is ordinarily

       undesirable to institute criminal proceedings until determination of

       civil proceedings in which the same issues are involved. It is too

       well known to need elaboration that criminal proceedings lend

       themselves to the unscrupulous application of improper pressure

       with a view to influencing the course of the civil proceedings; and

       beyond that there is the mischief, illustrated by this case of

       criminal      proceedings   being   instituted   with   an   imperfect

       appreciation of the facts where they have not been ascertained in
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                             Page 10 of 30
the more searching investigation of a Civil Court.
12.     Per contra, learned Senior Counsel Mr. Harish Salve for the

       respondent no.1 has argued that the right of reputation is part of the

       right of personal liberty protected by
Article 21
of the Constitution

       of India. He categorically submitted, "in today's world, the words

       used are more powerful than a sword".
13.     Learned Senior Counsel for the respondent no.1 referred to

       the     judgments   to   the   effect   that   the   law    relating       to

       contemporaneous civil and criminal actions has already been

       settled. While relying upon the judgment in the case of M.S.

       Sheriff (supra), the Hon'ble Apex Court subsequently clarified the

       law.
It was submitted by the learned Senior Counsel that the

       submission made on behalf of the petitioner that criminal and civil

       proceedings ought not to be permitted to run simultaneously was

       rejected in the case of
K.G. Premshanker v. Inspector of Police
(2002) 8 SCC 87. In the said case, it was observed that if the

       criminal case and the civil proceedings are for the same cause,

       judgment of the civil court would be relevant if conditions of any

       of
Sections 40
to
43
are satisfied. It was further observed that after
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                                Page 11 of 30
remand of the matter, civil proceedings as well as criminal

       proceedings are required to be decided on the basis of evidence.
It

       was further argued that the principle in
K.G. Premshanker
's case

       (supra) has been followed in various cases.
Further judgments

       relied upon are in the case of
Kishan Singh v. Gurpal Singh
(
2010) 8 SCC 775, Syed Askari Hadi Ali Augustine Imam v. State

       (Delhi Admn
.)
(
2009) 5 SCC 528, P. Swaroopa Rani v. M.Hari

       Narayana
(
2008) 5 SCC 765, Guru Granth Sthan Meerghat

       Vanaras v. Ved Prakash
(
2013) 7 SCC 622, Gnanasigamani

       Nadar v. Vedamuthu Nadar
AIR 1927 Mad 308, B.N. Kashyap v.

       Emperor AIR 1945 Lah 23, Subal Kumar Dey v. Public

       Prosecutor, West Tripura, Agartala and others 2009
CriLJ 4338,

       Yelchuri Ranganayakalu Chetty v. Gopala Chetty
1953 MWN Cr

       19, Emperor v. Dinalshah Rajanshah and others AIR 1933 Sind

       358, Padmanabhani Ramanamma alias
Bullemma v. Golusu

       Appalanarasayya
AIR 1932 Mad 254, K.L. Dhall v. D.P. Dutta

       1985 (8) DRJ 286, Thomas Dana v. State of Punjab AIR 1959 SC

       375, U Tha Zan v. U Pyant AIR 1935 Rangoon 487, Aran

       Bimavad v. Anshul Jain
AIR 2016 MP 63, Iqbal Singh Marwah
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                          Page 12 of 30
v. Meenakshi Marwah
(
2005) 4 SCC 370, Lalmuni Devi v.

       Jagdish Tiwary
AIR 2005 Pat 51, Narayanan v. Mathan Mathai
AIR 1982 Ker 238, Seth Ramdayal Jat v. Laxmi Prasad
(2009) 11

       SCC 545, Devendra v. State of UP (2009) 7 SCC 495, Ravinder

       Singh v. State of Haryana (
1975) 3 SCC 742 and State of

       Rajasthan v. Kalyan Sundaram Cement Industries Ltd.
(1996) 3

       SCC 87.
14.     It was further argued by the learned Senior Counsel for the

       respondent no.1 that the burden of proof and the consequences in a

       criminal case vis-a-vis a civil case being distinct. The criminal

       defamation proceeding examines criminal intent whereas in the

       civil proceedings, the act of defamation along with the nature and

       extent of damages is in issue. The present petition is a dilatory

       tactic with a view to delay the proceedings in the complaint case.

       It was further argued that the written statement has been filed in

       the civil suit, so no prejudice can be caused to the petitioner.
15.
In the judgment relied upon by the learned Senior Counsel

       for the respondent no.1 in the case of
Kishan Singh
(supra), it was

       observed :
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                              Page 13 of 30
"Thus, in view of the above, the law on the
                     issue stands crystallized to the effect that the
                     findings of fact recorded by the civil court
                     do not have any bearing so far as the
                     criminal case is concerned and vice versa.
                     Standard of proof is different in civil and
                     criminal cases. In civil cases it is
                     preponderance of probabilities while in
                     criminal cases it is proof beyond reasonable
                     doubt. There is neither any statutory nor
                     any legal principle that findings recorded by
                     the court either in civil or criminal
                     proceedings shall be binding between the
                     same parties while dealing with the same
                     subject-matter and both the cases have to be
                     decided on the basis of the evidence
                     adduced therein. However, there may be
                     cases where the relevance of
Sections 41
to
43
of the Evidence Act, 1872, dealing with
                     the relevance of previous judgments in
                     subsequent cases may be taken into
                     consideration."
In the case of
Guru Granth Saheb Sthan Meerghat Vanras
(supra) it was observed :
"In light of the above legal position, it may
                     be immediately observed that the High
                     Court was not at all justified in staying the
                     proceedings in the civil suit till the decision
                     of criminal case. Firstly, because even if
                     there is possibility of conflicting decisions in
                     the civil and criminal courts, such an
                     eventuality cannot be taken as a relevant
                     consideration. Secondly, in the facts of the
                     present case there is no likelihood of any
                     embarrassment         to    the      defendants
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                              Page 14 of 30
(Respondents 1 to 4 herein) as they had
                     already filed the written statement in the
                     civil suit and based on the pleadings of the
                     parties the issues have been framed. In this
                     view of the matter, the outcome and/or
                     findings that may be arrived at by the civil
                     court will not at all prejudice the defence(s)
                     of Respondents 1 to 4 in the criminal
                     proceedings."
In the case of
Gnanasigamani Nadar
(supra) it was

       observed:
"It may be highly undesirable but the
                     question remains whether it is less
                     undesirable to have the dispute fought out
                     first in one Court and then in the other. That
                     it must be fought out is inevitable and it
                     must be fought out in both Courts. If the
                     civil case is stayed pending the criminal
                     case, it will have practically the same result
                     as staying neither case: for ordinarily the
                     criminal case will be finally concluded in 3
                     to 6 months, and the civil case in 3 to 6
                     years; so that delaying the civil case will
                     have little effect and in my opinion will do
                     no good. If the criminal case is stayed
                     pending the civil case, then, as pointed out
                     above, a person presumably innocent, is left
                     for years with a criminal case hanging over
                     him; and if ultimately proved to be guilty he
                     will have successfully staved off his well
                     merited punishment for an equal period. In
                     either view the stay of the criminal
                     proceeding is objectionable. Therefore, the
                     least undesirable course is to adhere to the
                     main principle and to let both cases proceed
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                             Page 15 of 30
with all possible dispatch."
In the case of K.L. Dhall (supra) it was observed :
"....I am, however, unable to see as to how
                     that itself operates as a bar for the
                     respondent's setting in motion the criminal
                     law which is a separate and independent
                     remedy available to an aggrieved person in
                     such a situation. It was next submitted by
                     Mr. Chawla that the learned Magistrate
                     should have waited for the result of the civil
                     litigation and he should not have summoned
                     the petitioner till the civil suit was disposed
                     of by the civil court. There is no merit in
                     this submission. As mentioned by me
                     already above, both the matters namely the
                     civil suit as pending in the civil court and
                     the complaint as filed by the respondent
                     before the learned Magistrate are separate
                     and independent proceedings and they can
                     go on side by side. In my opinion there is
                     no bar to the Magistrate taking cognizance
                     of the offence which he may be of opinion
                     to have been committed by a person whose
                     matter is still pending in a civil court as is
                     the situation in the present case. In the end
                     the petition is dismissed."
In the case of Thomas Dana (supra) it was observed :
"It is true that the petitioners were dealt with
                     by the Collector of Central Excise and Land
                     Customs, for the "offence" of smuggling;
                     were found "guilty", and a deterrent
                     "punishment" was imposed upon them, but
                     as he had not been vested with the powers of
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                              Page 16 of 30
a Magistrate or a criminal court, his
                     proceedings against the petitioners were in
                     the nature of Revenue proceedings, with a
                     view to detecting the infringement of the
                     provisions of the Sea Customs Act, and
                     imposing penalties when it was found that
                     they had been guilty of those infringements.
                     Those penalties, the Collector had been
                     empowered to impose in order not only to
                     prevent a recurrence of such infringements,
                     but also to recoup the loss of revenue
                     resulting from such infringements. A person
                     may be guilty of certain acts which expose
                     him to a criminal prosecution for a criminal
                     offence, to a penalty under the law intended
                     to collect the maximum revenue under the
                     Taxing law, and/or, at the same time, make
                     him liable to damages in torts. For example,
                     an assessee under the Income-tax law, may
                     have submitted a false return with a view to
                     defrauding the Revenue. His fraud being
                     detected, the Taxing Officer may realise
                     from him an amount which may be some
                     multiple of the amount of tax sought to be
                     evaded. But the fact that he has been
                     subjected to such a penalty by the Taxing
                     Authorities, may not avail him against a
                     criminal prosecution for the offence of
                     having submitted a return containing false
                     statements to his knowledge. Similarly, a
                     person may use defamatory language against
                     another person who may recover damages in
                     tort against the maker of such a defamatory
                     statement. But the fact that a decree for
                     damages has been passed against him by the
                     civil court, would not stand in the way of his
                     being prosecuted for defamation. In such
                     cases, the law does not allow him the plea of
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                             Page 17 of 30
double jeopardy."
In the case of Aran Bhimavad (supra) it was observed :
"In the light of the above legal position, it
                     may be immediately observed that the High
                     Court was not at all justified in staying the
                     proceedings in the civil suit till the decision
                     of criminal case. Firstly, because even if
                     there is possibility of conflicting decisions in
                     the civil and criminal courts, such an
                     eventuality cannot be taken as a relevant
                     consideration. Secondly, in the facts of the
                     present case there is no likelihood of any
                     embarrassment         to    the      defendants
                     (respondent Nos.1 to 4 herein) as they had
                     already filed the written statement in the
                     civil suit and based on the pleadings of the
                     parties, the issues have been framed. In this
                     view of the matter, the outcome and/or
                     findings that may be arrived at by the civil
                     court will not at all prejudice the defence(s)
                     of the respondent Nos.1 to 4 in the criminal
                     proceedings."
16.     The main contention of the learned Senior Counsel for the

       petitioner is that since the civil suit is pending between the parties

       before this Court and the cause of action is also same, the criminal

       proceedings initiated by the respondent no.1 needs to be stayed

       until the decision in the civil suit as it may affect the criminal

       proceedings as the order delivered by this Court in civil suit would
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                              Page 18 of 30
be a matter of record and this Court being the Court of Record and

       thus the same shall tantamount to judgment in rem and would be

       binding on the subordinate courts under the High Court and

       furthermore, the trial court/Magistrate was competent to stay its

       proceedings under Section 309 Cr.P.C.
17.     On the contrary, the argument advanced by the learned

       Senior Counsel for respondent no.1 is that there is no legal

       impediment on the proceedings on the civil side as well as on the

       criminal side for the defamation as petitioner is entitled to knock

       the door of the court of law on both sides simultaneously. He

       further submitted that there cannot be any prejudice to the

       petitioner as the proceedings pending in the civil side in the High

       Court are likely to take much time whereas the case before the

       Criminal court is presently at the stage of framing the notice.
18.     The argument advanced by the counsel for the respondent

       no.1 is that the petitioner has not questioned the summoning order

       and that the matter is being proceeded in pursuance of the same

       and more the reason, petitioner has not initiated any such

       proceedings which could be prejudiced by the continuation of both
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                            Page 19 of 30
the proceedings, particularly when the issues have been framed on

       the civil side to which the evidence is to be led by the respondent

       no.1 and the criminal complaint case is fixed for framing of notice

       against the petitioner when the matter has been fixed for framing

       of the notice.
19.     It would be relevant to quote
Section 309(2)
of the Cr.P.C.

       which reads as under :
"If the Court after taking cognizance of an
                     offence, or commencement of trial, finds it
                     necessary or advisable to postpone the
                     commencement of, or adjourn, any inquiry
                     or trial, it may, from time to time, for
                     reasons to be recorded, postpone or adjourn
                     the same on such terms as it thinks fit, for
                     such time as it considers reasonable, and
                     may by a warrant remand the accused if in
                     custody."
20.     The first question before the court is whether the trial court

       is competent to stay the proceedings or not. Attention has been

       drawn to the judgment of High Court of Delhi where the

       Magistrate has stayed the proceedings and the same has been

       upheld by the High Court. (
Raminder Kaur Bedi v. Jatinder

       Singh Bedi
1989 (16) DRJ 154).
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                             Page 20 of 30
21.     The next question is to the effect as to whether similar

       proceedings can continue in the civil suit as well as criminal

       proceedings for defamation. The Hon'ble Apex Court dealt with

       this aspect and it was observed that :
"We are surprised how could the High Court
                     permit the husband to cast his covetous eyes
                     on the absolute and personal property of his
                     wife merely because it is kept in his custody,
                     thereby reducing the custody to a legal farce.
                     On the other hand, it seems to us that even if
                     the personal property of the wife is jointly
                     kept, it would be expressly or impliedly kept
                     in the custody of the husband and if he
                     dishonestly misappropriates or refuses to
                     return the same, he is certainly guilty of
                     criminal breach of trust, and there can be no
                     escape from this legal consequence. The
                     observations of the High Court at other
                     places regarding the inapplicability of
                     Section 406 do not appeal to us and are in
                     fact not in consonance with the spirit and
                     trend of the criminal law. There are a large
                     number of cases where criminal law and
                     civil law can run side by side. The two
                     remedies are not mutually exclusive but
                     clearly coextensive and essentially differ in
                     their content and consequence. The object of
                     the criminal law is to punish an offender
                     who commits an offence against a person,
                     property of the State for which the accused,
                     on proof of the offence, is deprived of his
                     liberty and in some cases even his life. This
                     does not, however, affect the civil remedies
                     at all for suing the wrong doer in cases like
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                             Page 21 of 30
arson, accidents, etc. It is an anathema to
                     suppose that when a civil remedy is
                     available, a criminal prosecution is
                     completely barred. The two types of actions
                     are quite different in content, scope and
                     import. It is not at all intelligible to us to
                     take the stand that if the husband dishonestly
                     misappropriates the stridhan property of his
                     wife, though kept in his custody, that would
                     bar prosecution under
Section 406
I.P.C. or
                     render the ingredients of
Section 405
IPC
                     nugatory or abortive. To say that because the
                     stridhan of a married woman is kept in the
                     custody of her husband, no action against
                     him can be taken as no offence is committed
                     is to override and distort the real intent of
                     the law. One of the arguments addressed by
                     the counsel for the respondent which had
                     appealed to the Full Bench of the Punjab &
                     Haryana High Court in Vinod Kumar's case
                     (supra) as also to our learned Brother
                     Varadarajan, J., is that after entering the
                     matrimonial home the custody of the
                     stridhan entrusted by the wife to her
                     husband becomes a sort of a partnership
                     firm and in this view of the matter the
                     question of criminal breach of trust does not
                     arise. In our opinion, it is neither appropriate
                     nor apposite to import the concept of
                     partnership in the relationship of husband
                     and wife for the simple reason that the
                     concept of partnership is entirely different
                     from that of the husband's keeping the
                     stridhan in his custody...."
[
Pratibha Rani v. Suraj Kumar and Anr
.
AIR 1985 SC 628]
22.     Nothing contrary to the ratio of the judgment has been
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                              Page 22 of 30
brought on record by the petitioner where the proceedings could

       have been stayed by the court other than the proceedings initiated

       by the accused had prejudiced.
23.     The law regarding 'causing prejudice' to an accused in the

       criminal case is settled.      It is well settled that where the

       proceedings against each other have been preferred by the

       complainant and accused, then the proceedings in the cross

       proceedings can cause prejudice to the accused in criminal

       proceedings. In the present case, it is not the case of the petitioner

       that any proceedings have been initiated by him. It is an admitted

       case of the parties that the civil suit has been filed by the

       respondent no.1 as well as the criminal defamation case at hand. It

       is not the case of the petitioner that he had preferred any

       proceedings either civil or criminal against the respondent no.1,

       pendency of which can cause prejudice to him.               Thus, the

       judgments relied upon by the petitioner in the case of Radheshyam

       Kejriwal (supra), M.S. Sheriff (supra),
Mausam Mia
(supra),
Raj

       Kumari Debi
(supra),
Raminder Kaur Bedi
(supra), Charanjiv

       Partap Ahluwalia (supra), Sunil Mehdiratta's case (supra), P.
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                             Page 23 of 30
Jayappan (supra) and J.M. Lucas (supra) are of no assistance to

       him.
24.     The other contention of the petitioner that if the civil

       proceedings as well as criminal proceedings are allowed to be

       continued in the present case, then it would tantamount to double

       jeopardy inasmuch as the petitioner would be convicted for

       criminal defamation in case the respondent no.1 succeeds in the

       criminal proceedings and would also be liable to pay damages in

       case the respondent no.1 succeeds in the civil proceedings.
25.
Section 10
of the Code of Civil Procedure (
CPC
) provides

       for staying of the suit. It reads :
"Stay of suits- No Court shall proceed with
                     the trial of any suit in which the matter in
                     issue is also directly and substantially in
                     issue in a previously instituted suit between
                     the same parties, or between parties under
                     whom they or any of them claim litigating
                     under the same title where such suit is
                     pending in the same or any other Court in
                     India having jurisdiction to grant the relief
                     claimed, or in any Court beyond the limits
                     of India established or continued by the
                     Central Government and having like
                     jurisdiction, or before the Supreme Court."
26.
Section 300
Cr.P.C. provides that person once convicted or
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                            Page 24 of 30
acquitted cannot be tried again for the same offence.              The

       contention of the petitioner is not tenable in view of the fact that

       the proceedings initiated by the respondent no.1 against him are

       entirely different. The matter in hand is the criminal defamation

       case and the other proceeding initiated by the respondent no.1

       against the petitioner is the civil suit for damages. Though it is

       correct that the parties in both these cases are same, but the fact

       remains that both the cases are different in nature. While the civil

       proceedings have been initiated claiming damages for damaging

       the reputation of the respondent no.1, the case at hand is the

       criminal defamation. Pendency of both the cases cannot be said to

       be said to be amounting to double jeopardy.
27.
Section 10
of the CPC provides for stay of the civil suit in

       which the matter in issue is directly and substantially in issue in a

       previously instituted suit between the same parties, or between

       parties under whom they or any of them claim litigation under the

       same title where such suit is pending in the same or any other

       Court in India. It is not the case of the petitioner that any civil

       proceedings have been initiated by him or by the respondent no.1
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                            Page 25 of 30
in which the issue is same. In the present matter, though the

       respondent no.1 initiated two proceedings i.e. one criminal and the

       other one civil, the fact remains that same are distinct and separate

       cases. Therefore, this Court is of the view that the petitioner

       cannot get the stay of the criminal defamation case at hand by

       claiming the benefit under
Section 10
of the CPC.
28.     The other contention of the petitioner is that this Court is the

       Court of Record and any finding recorded by this Court is binding

       on the Court subordinate to it. It was argued that the Court of

       Magistrate who is conducting the trial of criminal defamation case

       is subordinate to this Court and any findings recorded by this Court

       while exercising its civil jurisdiction would be binding on the

       Magistrate.
29.     The civil jurisdiction to this Court has been conferred by

       Delhi High Court (Original Side) Rules, 1967. It provides that in

       exercise of powers conferred by
Sections 122
and
129
of the CPC

       and
Section 7
of the Delhi High Court Act, 1966, this Court made

       the Delhi High Court (Original Side) Rules. As per Rule 1 of

       Chapter II, the jurisdiction to try and hear a civil suit has been
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                              Page 26 of 30
conferred upon the Single Judge of this Court.            The original

       jurisdiction of this Court is governed by the statute and not by the

       Constitution. On the other hand, the jurisdiction vested in the

       Magistrate to try and decide the criminal cases is conferred by the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 that too by a separate statute.

       When two separate statutes provide for separate jurisdiction to try

       civil and criminal cases in two different Courts, the same cannot be

       said to be binding upon each other or the Court subordinate to it.

       This Court is having the pecuniary jurisdiction to a specified limit

       to try and entertain the civil suits. Earlier the civil suits instituted

       before this Court were transferred to the District & Sessions Judge,

       Delhi and then to the concerned Civil Judges.
30.     A person may be guilty of certain acts which expose him to

       a criminal prosecution for a criminal offence. A person may use

       defamatory language against another person who may recover

       damages against the maker of such a defamatory statement. But the

       fact that a decree for damages has been passed against him by the

       civil court, would not stand in the way of him being prosecuted for

       defamation. There is no reason to see as to how that itself operates
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                              Page 27 of 30
as a bar for the respondent's setting in motion the criminal law

       which is a separate and independent remedy available to an

       aggrieved person in such a situation. As mentioned above, both

       the matters between the parties i.e. the civil suit as pending before

       this Court and the complaint filed by the respondent no.1 before

       the learned Magistrate are separate and independent proceedings

       and they can go on side by side. In my opinion, there is no bar to

       the Magistrate taking cognizance of the offence which he may be

       of opinion to have been committed by a person whose matter is

       still pending in a civil court as is the situation in the present case.
31.     In view of the above discussion, this Court is of the

       considered opinion that :
*The Magistrate is empowered to adjourn the
                     proceedings under
Section 309
Cr.P.C.
                     *There is no legal impediment to invoke the civil
                     proceedings for defamation as well as initiating the
                     criminal proceedings for defamation simultaneously
                     and continuation of the same.
*The proceedings initiated by the virtue of Delhi High
                     Court (Original Side) Rules, 1967 to invoke the
                     original jurisdiction in the High Court ipso facto does
                     not debar the Court of Magistrate (under the Code of
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                               Page 28 of 30
Criminal Procedure, 1973) to proceed with the
                     complaint.
*Prejudice to the right of the accused is the prime
                     consideration to stay the proceedings. No prejudice to
                     the right of the accused has been demonstrated in the
                     present case.
32.     Nothing has been brought before this Court to the effect that

       continuation of criminal proceedings is the abuse of the process of

       law before the learned Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and any

       order is required by this Court to secure the ends of justice. Thus,

       this Court is of the view that the order of the learned Chief

       Metropolitan Magistrate dated 19.05.2016 continuing with the

       proceedings is free from perversity, impropriety, illegality and

       non-sustainability which compelled this Court to exercise the

       inherent jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
33.     Keeping in view the discussion made above, there is no

       illegality or un-sustainability in the law in continuation of the

       criminal proceedings before the learned Chief Metropolitan

       Magistrate empowered to continue with the same. Resultantly, the

       request of the petitioner to adjourn the proceedings before the

       learned Chief Metropolitan Magistrate is rejected being devoid of
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                            Page 29 of 30
merit and the same is culminated into dismissal of the present

       petition.
34.      Before parting with the order, this Court would like to place

       it on record by way of abundant caution that whatever has been

       stated hereinabove in this order has been so said only for the

       purpose of disposing of the present petition. Nothing contained in

       this order shall be construed as expression of a final opinion on any

       of the issues of fact or law arising for decision in the case which

       shall naturally have to be done by the Trial Court seized of the

       trial.
35.      Application pending, if any, is also disposed of.
36.      Copy of the order be given to both the parties under the

       signature of the Court Master.
(P.S.TEJI)
                                                                      JUDGE
        OCTOBER 19, 2016
        dd
Crl.M.C. 2417/2016                                              Page 30 of 30