SOURCE: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/59702685/
SCRAPED: 2026-02-18T10:27:48.417996
TITLE: Full Document
================================================================================

[Cites
21
, Cited by
0
]
Delhi High Court
Arvind Kejriwal vs State & Anr on 5 February, 2024
Author:
Swarana Kanta Sharma
Bench:
Swarana Kanta Sharma
$~
                          *         IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

                          %                                                                     Reserved on: 10.01.2024
                                                                                              Pronounced on: 05.02.2024
                          +         CRL.M.C. 6347/2019
                                    ARVIND KEJRIWAL                                                                   ..... Petitioner
                                                                    Through:              Mr. Manish Vashishth, Senior
                                                                                          Advocate with Mr. Karan
                                                                                          Sharma, Mr. Rishabh Sharma,
                                                                                          Mr. Vedanth Vashishth, Mohd.
                                                                                          Irshad & Ms. Harshita
                                                                                          Nathrani, Advocates.
                                                                    versus

                                    STATE & ANR                                                       ..... Respondents
                                                                    Through:              Mr. Manoj Pant, APP for the
                                                                                          State.
                                                                                          Mr. Raghav Awasthi, Mr.
                                                                                          Kunal Tiwari and Mukesh
                                                                                          Sharma,      Advocates      for
                                                                                          respondent No.2.

                          CORAM:
                          HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE SWARANA KANTA SHARMA

                                                                    JUDGMENT
INDEX TO THE JUDGMENT
                          PRELUDE .......................................................................................... 3
                          BACKGROUND FACTS .................................................................... 5
                              The Allegations ............................................................................................... 7
                              History of Judicial Proceedings ..................................................................... 8
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                                                                  Page 1 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER ........................... 9
                          ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT NO. 2 ........... 12
                          THE ORDERS IMPUGNED BEFORE THIS COURT ............... 13
                          ANALYSIS & FINDINGS................................................................ 18
                          I. ARGUMENT THAT THE COMPLAINT WAS WITHDRAWN
                          EARLIER .......................................................................................... 18
                          II. THE OFFENCE OF DEFAMATION ...................................... 21
                             Meaning and Definition ............................................................................... 21
                             Provisions of Law ......................................................................................... 23
                             Essential Ingredients to Constitute Offence of Defamation .................. 25
                             Issuance of Process/Summons vis-a-vis Offence of Defamation:
Material Considerations ............................................................................... 28
                          III. BALANCING CRITICAL YET COMPETING INTERESTS:
FREEDOM OF SPEECH & EXPRESSION Vs PROTECTING A
                          PERSON FROM REPUTATIONAL INJURY .............................. 31
                          IV. MEETING THE CHALLENGE OF ADJUDICATING GREY
                          AREA OF LAW NOT YET EFFECTIVELY ADJUDICATED
                          UPON: LAYING FOUNDATION STONE OF
                          JURISPRUDENCE .......................................................................... 33
                             Pace of Spread of Scandalous Content: From the Echo of Whispers in
                             Pre-Digital Era compared to the Spread at Lightning Speed of Digital
                             Dissemination in Digital Era ....................................................................... 35
                          V. 'RETWEETING' A DEFAMATORY IMPUTATION WILL
                          AMOUNT TO 'PUBLICATION' FOR THE PURPOSE OF
                          APPLICABILITY OF SECTION 499 OF
IPC
................................ 36
                          VI. REACH & INFLUENCE OF THE PERSON RETWEETING
                          DEFAMATORY CONTENT .......................................................... 41
                          VII. WILL EVERY 'RETWEET' ATTRACT ACTION UNDER
                          SECTION 499 OF
IPC
? ................................................................... 42
                          VIII. WHETHER PETITIONER IS LIABLE TO BE
                          SUMMONED FOR HIS ACT OF RETWEETING THE
                          ALLEGEDLY DEFAMATORY CONTENT? ................................ 45
                          CONCLUSION ................................................................................ 49
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                                                              Page 2 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
SWARANA KANTA SHARMA, J.
PRELUDE
1.    The sheer magnanimity of reputational injury caused by
                          posting defamatory content against a person who holds his reputation
                          dear to him, which may often be dismissed as a mere tweet or
                          retweet, has been urged to be examined, persuading this Court to
                          adjudicate this critical issue since now the Cyber World turns
                          Whispers into Symphony.
2.    In today‟s digital age, the dynamics of law change, as
                          exemplified by the present case, where this Court has been posed
                          with a situation where reputational harm has been alleged by the
                          complainant by a repost in cyberspace. In this evolving digital age,
                          physical damage to someone‟s reputation is not the only possibility
                          but it is the cyber world which now has taken over the real world,
                          where if any defamatory statement is made, the effect of reputational
                          harm is amplified. In the realm of defamation, statements made in
                          the physical world may resemble a mere whisper, but when
                          echoed in the cyber domain, the impact magnifies exponentially.
3.    The issue before this Court through the present petition is one
                          which requires this Court to lay down certain principles based on
                          jurisprudence of defamation, in the light of the evolution of
                          cyberspace, and its extensive usage as a means to damage the
                          reputation of someone. The Court is posed with a situation where an
                          alleged defamatory content has been posted by an original author,
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                         Page 3 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
and then the same content has been retweeted/reposted on the popular
                          social media platform „Twitter‟ (now 'X') by the present petitioner.
4.    While the Courts may still struggle, faced with issue as to what
                          will amount to „publishing‟ and whether „re-tweeting‟ of a
                          defamatory content also amounts to publishing so as to be covered
                          under the definition of
Section 499
of Indian Penal Code, 1860
                          ('
IPC
'), the concerns arising out of such vast reach of defamatory
                          content and corresponding reputational injury to a person has given
                          rise to the following important question of law:
Whether 'Retweeting' any defamatory
                                          content will be covered in the meaning of
                                          'publication' or not, in terms of
Section
                                          499
of IPC & whether the act of the
                                          person 'retweeting' such content though
                                          not being the original author of the tweet,
                                          will also be liable to attract action under
Section 499
of IPC or can he take refuge
                                          under the argument that he was not the
                                          original author of the content?
5.    In case reported as 2017 SCC Online Delhi 1191, this Court
                          had observed that it was for the Trial Court to decide if retweeting an
                          allegedly defamatory content/tweet would attract rigours of
Section
                          499
of IPC or not, by way of a full fledged trial. These observations
                          are as under:
"26. ...Whether retweeting would attract the liability
                                          under
Section 499
IPC, is a question which requires to be
                                          determined in the totality of the circumstances and the
                                          same will have to be determined during trial and any
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                                   Page 4 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
interference at this stage by this court is likely to
                                       prejudice the findings of the Trial Court..."
6.    In this background, this Court is of the opinion that whether a
                          retweet is defamatory in content or not, so as to attract rigours of
Section 499
of IPC, will of course be a matter of trial. However,
                          whether 'Retweeting' by a person, a defamatory content, will amount
                          to 'publication' or not so as to form the ingredient of
Section 499
of
                          IPC for the purpose of summoning of an accused, will essentially
                          have to be decided prior to commencement of the trial. It is not the
                          issue for adjudication before this Court in the present case to return a
                          finding as to whether it was proved beyond doubt that the retweet in
                          question was defamatory or not. The issue before this Court is the
                          critical issue as to whether a retweet in itself, being not
                          considered as original content by an original author, can form
                          the basis of summoning an accused for offence under
Section 499
of IPC.
7.    This major issue being at the centre of controversy in multiple
                          cases pending before this Court reveal the difficulties currently faced
                          by Trial Courts in this regard and has persuaded this Court to take a
                          comprehensive look at this issue for the purpose of summoning an
                          accused.
BACKGROUND FACTS
8.    On 06.05.2018, one Sh. Dhruv Rathee i.e. original author of
                          the impugned/alleged defamatory content had uploaded a video on
                          YouTube, wherein inter alia, certain allegations were made against
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                             Page 5 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
respondent no. 2 which has been referred to as 'First Offending
                          Publication' in the petition. On 07.05.2018, Sh. Dhruv Rathee
                          published on his Twitter account, an allegation that the Information
                          and Technology („IT‟) Cell of Bharatiya Janata Party („BJP‟) had
                          attempted to bribe a person to defame Sh. Dhruv Rathee and he had
                          drawn a reference to Uniform Resource Locator („URL‟) of the first
                          impugned publication, which has now been termed as 'Second
                          Offending Publication' in the petition. On 07.05.2018, the petitioner
                          herein, Sh. Arvind Kejriwal had reposted i.e. „retweeted‟ the second
                          offending publication of Sh. Dhruv Rathee, which is termed as the
                          'Impugned Publication', and which read as under:
9.    On     28.02.2019,   a    complaint    was    filed    by      the
                          complainant/respondent no. 2 Sh. Vikas Sankritayan @ Vikas
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                          Page 6 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
Pandey, against the petitioner Sh. Arvind Kejriwal, for initiating
                          proceedings against him for commission of offences punishable
                          under
Section 499
/
500
of IPC.
The Allegations
10.   Respondent no. 2 states that he is the founder and operator of
                          popular social media page "I SUPPORT NARENDRA MODI", and
                          that it shows true and correct information, and has a following of
                          over crores of persons on his social media handles. He alleges that
                          Sh. Dhruv Rathee, who claims to be an engineer and lives in
                          Germany, operates a YouTube channel under the name and style of
                          „Dhruv Rathee‟ and has a huge following, and as on date of filing of
                          complaint, he had 16,26,422 subscribers. According to the complaint
                          filed alongwith the supporting evidence before the learned Trial
                          Court, a YouTube video with the title "BJP IT Cell Part-2" was
                          circulated by Sh. Dhruv Rathee on 06.05.2018, wherein certain
                          defamatory statements were made against respondent no. 2, extracts
                          of which are reproduced hereinbelow:
"...Vikas Pandey is the Second-in-Command of the BJP
                                       IT Cell. Through his Social Media Page, "I Support
                                       Narendra Modi", which is linked by more than 1 Crore
                                       50 Lakh people, Vikas Pandey spreads fake news. Vikas
                                       Pandey has offered a bribe of Rs. 50 Lakhs to Mahavir
                                       Prasad through one Abhishek Mishra".
***
                                       "... Yahaan pe aap dekh sakte hain dosto Mahavir pura try
                                       kar rha hai ki kisi trah se Vikas Pandey se directly phone
                                       pe baat ho jaaye uski, qki agar uski audio recording
                                       saamne aa gyi to puri tarah se inka game over ho jaana
                                       tha. Lekin unfortunately iski audio recording saamne nahi
                                       aa payi, yahi ek reason hai ki mene is video ko upload
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                                 Page 7 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
karne me bhi 2 mahine laga diye, usko do mahine guzar
                                       chuke hain. Qki me bhi try kar rha tha Mahavir ko bolne
                                       ki. .. ki tu is tarah se try kar ... tu us tarah se try kar ...
                                       kiisse directly phone par baat ho jaaye, wo audio
                                       recording mil jaati to boht sahi ho jaata. Lekin kher nahi
                                       mil paayi, ye bhi boht achha proof hai mujhe lagta hai, ye
                                       bhi boht definite proof hai ki BJP IT Cell aise gande
                                       kaam karta hai
                                       .... Or dekh abhi, bhi time hai galti hui hai tujhse uske liye
                                       rl,laafi maang Ie, ek naya video bana or desh ki janta se
                                       sorry bol de ki haan mene ye galti kari pr me iske liye
                                       maafi mangta hu. Or desh ko sach bata ki Vikas Pandey
                                       or BJP IT Cell ke baare me, qki ye log desh" ko tabah
                                       karne me lage "- hue hain, itni nafrat faila rahe hain aaj
                                       ke time me .....
.... Is video ko share kijiye dosto or janta fak sach
                                       pahunchaaiye iske baare me ...."
11.   Thereafter, Sh. Dhruv Rathee had also shared the URL of the
                          defamatory video on his Twitter account.
12.   It is alleged that the petitioner herein had then retweeted the
                          said defamatory content from his Twitter account, without checking
                          the authenticity of the video, prior to spreading it to the public at
                          large. It is further alleged that Sh. Arvind Kejriwal is followed by a
                          large number of people, and by retweeting the offending content, he
                          had made available the defamatory content to a large number of
                          audience, at national and international level.
13.   He further alleged that two of his friends namely Sh. Abhishek
                          Kulshrestra and Sh. Punit Agrawal had called him to express their
                          dismay with regard to the allegations made against him.
History of Judicial Proceedings
14.   The respondent no. 2 was examined under
Section 200
of the
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                                      Page 8 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 ('
Cr.P.C
.') at the pre-summoning
                          stage, as he had filed the complaint under
Section 499
/
500
of IPC on
                          the allegations mentioned above. The petitioner was summoned as an
                          accused by the learned Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate-I,
                          Rouse Avenue Courts, New Delhi ('Trial Court') vide order of
                          summoning dated 17.07.2019.
15.   Being aggrieved by the issuance of summons and the
                          complaint filed by the respondent no. 2, the petitioner had preferred a
                          revision petition before the Sessions Court which was dismissed vide
                          order dated 30.10.2019 by learned Additional Sessions Judge/Special
                          Judge (PC Act) CBI-09, Rouse Avenue Courts, New Delhi ('Sessions
                          Court').
16.   Aggrieved by the aforesaid orders passed by the learned Trial
                          Court and Sessions Court, the petitioner Sh. Arvind Kejriwal has
                          approached this Court by way of present petition under
Section 482
of Cr.P.C. seeking setting aside of the order dated 17.07.2019 passed
                          by the learned Trial Court in in Ct.Case No.15/2019, and order dated
                          30.10.2019 passed in Criminal Revision No. 28/2019 by the learned
                          Sessions Court.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER
17.   Sh. Manish Vashishth, learned Senior Counsel appearing on
                          behalf of the petitioner, while assailing the orders passed by both the
                          learned Trial Court and Sessions Court, argues that the learned Trial
                          Court has summoned the petitioner in a mechanical manner and has
                          presumed the alleged statements/re-tweet to be defamatory on the
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                          Page 9 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
face of it, without even properly examining the same. It is stated that
                          summoning is contrary to the settled principles of law since the
                          Magistrate has to carefully scrutinize the evidence brought on record
                          and must satisfy itself that the ingredients of the alleged offence are
                          made out, which was not done in this case. It is argued that a bare
                          perusal of the retweet in question would show that the same does not
                          constitute any offence of defamation as the offence of defamation,
                          besides the requirement of mens rea, should consist of three essential
                          ingredients i.e. (i) making or publishing any imputation concerning
                          any person, (ii) such imputations must have been made by words
                          either spoken or intended to be read or by signs or by visible
                          representations, and (iii) the said imputation must have been made
                          with the intention to harm or with knowledge or having reason to
                          believe that it will harm the reputation of the person concerned. It is
                          submitted by learned Senior Counsel that the impugned orders failed
                          to appreciate that the alleged re-tweet was not done with intent to
                          harm respondent no. 2, nor was it likely to harm him in any manner.
                          It is further argued that the learned Trial Court has failed to consider
                          that admittedly, the entire version deposed by PW-2 is hearsay, and
                          an expression of dismay is not defamation. It is contended that the
                          best case as alleged by the respondent no. 2 is that the petitioner has
                          retweeted a link of some video, of which neither the petitioner was
                          creator/author nor publisher of the same, and thus, essential
                          ingredients of the defamation are not attracted in the present case as
                          the same would not amount to publication in terms of ingredients of
Section 499
of IPC. It is also stated that the learned Trial Court, while
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                            Page 10 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
passing the impugned summoning order, has failed to consider the
                          exceptions provided under
Section 499
of IPC, including the
                          exception of public good, and has recorded an erroneous finding that
                          at this stage, the consideration is whether there exists sufficient
                          grounds to summon or not.
18.   Further, it is also argued by learned Senior Counsel for the
                          petitioner, that the respondent no. 2 had initially filed a complaint i.e.
                          Ct. Cases 5786/2018 in Saket Courts, South East District, Delhi and
                          on 18.10.2018, he had got his statement recorded before the
                          concerned Magistrate and had withdrawn the complaint qua the
                          petitioner, and accordingly the proceedings qua the petitioner herein
                          were dropped. It is submitted that withdrawal/dropping of
                          proceedings qua an accused in complaint case amounts to acquittal of
                          the accused as per
Section 257
of Cr.P.C, therefore, no cause of
                          action whatsoever survives against the petitioner herein and the
                          respondent no. 2 cannot be allowed to bypass the mandate of law by
                          filing a fresh complaint case. It is therefore argued that respondent
                          no. 2 had withdrawn his earlier complaint qua the petitioner and had
                          instituted a subsequent complaint against the petitioner alleging that
                          the petitioner through his retweet had defamed the respondent no. 2,
                          without arraying the other accused persons in the present complaint.
                          It is submitted that only recourse available to the respondent no. 2
                          was to approach this Court under
Section 407
of Cr.P.C. seeking
                          transfer of the case to the Court of competent jurisdiction.
19.   It is also contended that the petitioner was not named by the
                          respondent no. 2 in his statement dated 18.10.2018 recorded in the
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                             Page 11 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
earlier complaint case whereas in the statement dated 01.05.2019
                          recorded in the present case, the respondent no. 2 because of his
                          mala-fide intention, has deposed an entirely different version and
                          named the petitioner. Thus, it is argued that respondent no. 2 has
                          deposed two entirely different versions and purposely named the
                          petitioner, which on the face of it, shows mala-fide intentions and
                          oblique motives. Therefore, in view of these submissions, learned
                          Senior Counsel prays that the present petition be allowed and the
                          impugned order be set aside or the case be remanded back to the
                          learned Trial Court for deciding afresh as per law.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT NO. 2
20.   Sh. Raghav Awasthi, learned counsel for respondent no. 2,
                          who seeks to sustain the impugned orders, argues that the allegations
                          made against the respondent no. 2 are false, malicious and
                          defamatory and the same have lowered his reputation in the eyes of
                          right thinking members of the society. It is contended that without
                          there being any proof in support of allegations levelled against the
                          respondent no. 2, the petitioner herein, who is the Chief Minister of
                          Delhi, has retweeted the video, shared by Sh. Dhruv Rathee on his
                          YouTube channel, without verifying its authenticity and due to the
                          large following of the petitioner herein, the video had reached a large
                          number of people not only in India, but internationally also. On these
                          grounds, it is argued that the impugned orders suffer from no
                          infirmity and the learned Trial Court has rightly summoned the
                          petitioner herein in the present case since a prima facie case of
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                          Page 12 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
defamation is made out against the petitioner and the issues which the
                          petitioner has raised by way of this petition are all triable in nature.
21.   It is further submitted on behalf of respondent no. 2 that the
                          earlier complaint filed by respondent no. 2 before the Saket Courts,
                          Delhi was withdrawn qua the present petitioner only since the said
                          Court was not competent to try any matter in relation to the petitioner
                          herein, who is an MLA and Chief Minister of Delhi, and therefore,
                          the respondent no. 2 had no option but to withdraw the complaint
                          from the previous Court with liberty to file a fresh complaint against
                          the petitioner in the court which is competent to try cases pertaining
                          to MPs/MLAs.
In this regard, reliance is also placed on decision of
                          this Court in case of
Satish Dayal Mathur v. Mackinnon Mackenzie
                          and Company MANU/DE/0240/1986
to argue that
Section 257
of
                          Cr.P.C would not be applicable. On these grounds, learned counsel
                          for respondent no. 2 prays that the present petition be dismissed.
22.   This Court has heard arguments addressed by learned Senior
                          Counsel for the petitioner as well as learned counsel for respondent
                          no. 2, and has gone through the material placed on record and written
                          submissions filed by both the parties.
THE ORDERS IMPUGNED BEFORE THIS COURT
23.   The learned Trial Court, while summoning the petitioner
                          herein vide order dated 17.07.2019, had passed the following order:
"11. Defamatory statement is one which tends to injure the
                                    reputation of a person. It is a publication which tends to
                                    lower a person's reputation in the estimation of right
                                    thinking members of the society generally or which make
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                                Page 13 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
them shun or avoid that person. 'According to
section 499
of The
Indian Penal Code
, a person is said to commit the
                                    offence of defamation when he, by words either spoken or
                                    intended to be read, or by signs or by visible
                                    representations, makes or publishes any imputation
                                    concerning any person intending ,to harm, or knowing or
                                    having reason to believe that such imputation will harm,
                                    the reputation of such person except where the publication
                                    is protected by the ten statutory exceptions provided in this
                                    provision itself.
12. The complaint clearly set out the imputations made
                                    against the complainant by the respondent. The
                                    complainant has relied upon the defamatory video Ex.
                                    CW1/2 and computer printout of the tweet Ex.CW1/3 of
                                    the respondent whereby he re-tweeted the video. These
                                    electronic evidences are supported by the complainant's
                                    certificate under
section 65 B
of the Indian Evidence Act
                                    Ex.CW1/5. Complainant 'has also filed the transcript of the
                                    video on record.
13. Respondent is not the original author of the alleged
                                    defamatory video. The only allegations against him is that
                                    he re-tweeted the video containing the defamatory
                                    allegations against the complainant, without confirming its
                                    veracity.
14. In this manner, what the respondent has done, is that he
                                    has repeated the defamatory statements on a social media
                                    platform, which amounts to its further publication. It is no
                                    defence to an action of defamation that the respondent
                                    published it by way of repetition. "Talebearers are as bad
                                    as tale-makers". Every repetition of defamatory words is a
                                    new publication and a distinct cause of action.
15. In order to decide whether to summon respondent for
                                    trial, existence of only a prima facie case to summon them
                                    has to be seen in contrast to the standard of proof "beyond
                                    reasonable doubt" required for conviction. In legal terms,
                                    the consideration at this stage is whether there exists
                                    sufficient grounds to summon them or not (section 204 of
                                    The
Code of Criminal Procedure
). The situation may be
                                    different if the respondent is able to make out a defence for
                                    him from amongst those defences carved out in the
                                    provision itself (section 499 of The
Indian Penal Code
).
                                    But these defences cannot be looked at this stage according
                                    to the law. The defences have to be pleaded and proved by
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                                   Page 14 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
the person charged with defamation. At the initial stage,
                                    the Court has to look into the complaint and the
                                    statement/evidence of the complainant and has to believe
                                    him. The Court has to see whether if the impugned material
                                    is prima facie defamatory or not and whether the Court has
                                    sufficient grounds to proceed with the case. The video
referred above
are if seen in the entire context of the things
                                    and evidence of the complainant seems to be defamatory if
                                    they do not fall within any of the statutory defences
                                    prescribed by law itself as well as the other legal
                                    requirements. The entire burden will be on respondent to
                                    plead and prove the defence on which he may rely upon.
16. In defamation cases, one of the test is whether under
                                    the circumstances in which the writing was published
                                    reasonable men to whom the publication was made would'
                                    be likely to understand it in a defamatory sense. Much also
                                    depends on the intention of the maker of the statement
                                    which is a subject of trial.
17. Therefore, the aforesaid discussions shows that
                                    allegations in the video are prima facie defamatory and
                                    refers to complainant Mr. Vikas Sankrityayan @ Vikas
                                    Pandey making him an aggrieved person within the
                                    meaning of
section 199
Cr.P.C. The inquiry as
                                    contemplated under
section 202
of the Code of Criminal
                                    Procedure has been duly conducted by examining the
                                    complainant and his witnesses to arrive at the conclusion
                                    for this stage of the case. Therefore, in view of the
                                    aforesaid discussion there exists sufficient grounds to
                                    proceed against the respondent Arvind Kejriwal under
section 500
IPC. Accordingly, Sh. Arvind Kejriwal is
                                    summoned for commission of offence of defamation under
section 500
of the Indian Penal Code."
8.    Learned Sessions Court, while dismissing the revision petition
                          filed by the petitioner where the order of summoning was challenged,
                          had passed the following order dated 30.10.2019:
"21. It is not in dispute that republication of libel is a new
                                   libel which was so held in the case of
Harbhajan Singh vs
                                   State of Punjab
, 1961 Cri. Law Journal 710. It was further
                                   observed therein that the publisher of the libel is strictly
                                   responsible, irrespective of the fact whether he is the
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                                    Page 15 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
originator of the libel or is merely repeating it. Tweeter a
                                   micro blogging and social network website, is used for
                                   spreading of messages. The Tweets so made on this platform
                                   are read by public on Internet who visit the platform of the
                                   creator of the Tweet. The platform, like Tweeter, can be
                                   used for sharing ideas and dissemination of thoughts.
                                   Whenever the user of this platform after reading the Tweet
                                   click on the 're-tweet' button of any user, the Tweet reaches
                                   the followers of the 're-tweeting' user. Thus, it reaches the
                                   new viewers for whom it may amount to publication. Re-
                                   tweeting, therefore, would amount to re-publication so far as
                                   the followers of retweeting user are concerned.
22. The question in the present revision petition is whether
                                   the revisionist had re-tweeted the contents of the video. The
                                   learned counsel for the revisionist has submitted that the
                                   revisionist has not re-tweeted the video. However, the copy
                                   of the re- tweet placed on record shows that the link of video
                                   was also mentioned in the re-tweet. The re-tweet by the
                                   revisionist shows that he has referred to the link i.e.
                                   "youtu.be/BsIKjxaP4Ik" on which the video containing the
                                   defamatory contents can be watched. He has further
                                   mentioned 'Share and RT'. Thus, it appears that the
                                   revisionist had re-tweeted the entire tweet along with
                                   mentioning the link on which the video can be watched by
                                   his followers on his tweeter account.
23. Learned counsel for revisionist argued that there was no
                                   intention on the part of the revisionist to cause any
                                   defamation. He referred to the judgment titled as
Standard
                                   Chartered Bank vs Vinay Kumar Sood, CrL M. C.
                                   No.3828/2007
decided on 06.02.2009. He argued that the
                                   revisionist does not know complainant therefore, there
                                   cannot be any intention on his part to cause harm to the
                                   reputation of complainant. In the judgment on which learned
                                   counsel has relied, it was observed by the Hon'ble Delhi
                                   High Court that the intention to cause harm is most essential
                                   sine qua non for the offence under
Section 499
IPC. It was
                                   held that the offence under
Section 500
IPC requires blame
                                   worthy mind and is not a statutory offence requiring no
                                   mensrea.
However, it may be noted here that the Hon'ble
                                   Delhi High Court in the
Standard Chartered Bank
's case
                                   (supra) was dealing with a car in which a limited company
                                   was arrayed as an accused for the offence under
Section 500
IPC. Therefore, the court dealt with the issue of 'mensrea'
                                   and held that a company cannot in any case be held guilty
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                                   Page 16 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
under
Section 500
IPC because the most essential
                                   ingredients of the offence i.e. 'mensrea' would be missing as
                                   a company is juristic entity or an artificial person.
24.
Section 499
IPC defines the offence on defamation as
                                   under:" Defamation.-Whoever, by words either spoken or
                                   intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations,
                                   makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person
                                   intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe
                                   that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such
                                   person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter expected, to
                                   defame that person."
25. A bare perusal of the definition of the defamation would
                                   show that the imputation which harm the reputation of the
                                   person against whom they are made must be either (a) with
                                   an intention, or (b) with knowledge or (c) having reasons to
                                   believe that such imputation will harm the reputation of the
                                   'person concerned'.
26. Whether in a particular case there was any such
                                   intention, knowledge, reason to believe or not is a question
                                   of fact which can be decided by way of leading evidence.
Section 499
IPC is also subject to certain exceptions which
                                   bring the imputation out of the periphery of defamation.
                                   However, these exceptions would always be question of
                                   facts which can be decided at the trial. What is the nature of
                                   imputation, under what Circumstances it was made, the
                                   status of the person who is making imputation and of the
                                   person against whom the said imputation is made, whether
                                   the imputation were made in good faith etc. are some of the
                                   defences which are available to an accused. However, such
                                   defence can be considered by the trial court after the
                                   evidence is led by both the parties.
27. The impugned order has dealt with all the relevant
                                   aspects of the issues involved at the stage of summoning. At
                                   this stage, the court has only to see if there are sufficient
                                   grounds to proceed further or not and if the impugned order
                                   is weighed on this scale then I find no illegality, in propriety
                                   or irregularity in the order.
28. With these observations, the revision petition is
                                   dismissed.
29. TCR along with the copy of the order be sent to the
                                   learned trial court.
30. Revision Petition be consigned to record room."
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                                     Page 17 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
ANALYSIS & FINDINGS

                          I.    ARGUMENT             THAT         THE        COMPLAINT              WAS
                          WITHDRAWN EARLIER
24.   It was argued on behalf of the petitioner that respondent no. 2
                          had earlier withdrawn a complaint which he had filed against three
                          accused persons in Saket Courts, Delhi with the liberty to approach
                          appropriate Court, and in these circumstances,
Section 257
of Cr.P.C.
                          would come into picture which provides that if a complainant
                          withdraws his complaint against an accused, the Magistrate may
                          permit him to do so, thereby acquitting the accused. While opposing
                          these arguments, it was contended on behalf of respondent no. 2 that
                          the previous complaint qua the present petitioner, who was accused
                          no. 3 therein, was withdrawn with liberty to file a fresh in the Court
                          having competent jurisdiction to deal with cases pertaining to
                          MPs/MLAs and the same would not amount to an acquittal.
In this
                          regard, learned counsel for respondent no. 2 had relied on the
                          decision of this Court in case of
Satish Dayal Mathur
(supra),
                          wherein it was held as under:
"17. These observations in my view are very apposite in the
                                   facts of the case on hand. Since the learned Additional Chief
                                   Metropolitan Magistrate was of the view, though
                                   erroneously, that the entire proceedings were illegal because
                                   of noncompliance with the mandatory provisions of Section
                                   200, he could not have in all fairness to him passed an order
                                   of acquittal in terms of Section 257 the Code and this is
                                   what he precisely did. So applying the ratio of the decisions
                                   adverted to above which has also been referred to by both
                                   the courts below, the order dated 5th August 1983 of the
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                                  Page 18 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
learned Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate in the
                                   previous complaint cannot operate as an acquittal within the
                                   meaning of Section 257 so as to bar subsequent prosecution
                                   of the petitioner on the same facts."
25.   This Court notes that in the present case, the respondent no. 2
                          herein had filed a complaint i.e. Ct. Cases 5786/2018, titled „Vikas
                          Sankritayan @ Vikas Pandey v. Dhruv Rathee & Ors.‟ on 04.07.2018
                          for offence under
Section 499
/
500
of IPC against three accused
                          persons i.e. Sh. Dhruv Rathee (the original author), one Sh. Mahavir
                          Prasad Khileri and Sh. Arvind Kejriwal i.e. the petitioner herein. On
                          18.10.2018, the complainant had tendered his pre-summoning
                          evidence, and on the same date, he had also given a statement before
                          the learned MM-01, South-East, Saket Court, Delhi that he wishes to
                          withdraw his complaint against accused no. 3 with liberty to file
                          afresh before the court of competent jurisdiction. This statement
                          reads as under:
"On SA
                                    I wish to withdraw my complaint against alleged No. 3 Sh.
                                    Arvind Kejriwal with liberty to file the same before the Court
                                    of competent jurisdiction. I may be permitted for the same.
                                    RO & AC"
26.   Further, on the same day, the following order was passed by
                          the learned Magistrate:
"Complainant submits that he wishes to withdraw his
                                    complaint qua alleged No. 3 Sh. Arvind Kejriwal with liberty
                                    to file fresh complaint as per law in the court having
                                    competent jurisdiction. Statement of the complainant is
                                    separately recorded to this effect and name of alleged No. 3 is
                                    dropped accordingly.
Complainant is examined as CW1 and discharged.
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                                  Page 19 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
Complainant seeks time to file the list of remaining witnesses
                                    and for further pre summoning evidence. Heard. Allowed.
                                    Be put up for further pre summoning..."
27.   Thereafter, in the aforesaid complaint case, the learned
                          Magistrate had issued summons to the other two accused persons
                          vide order dated 23.07.2019.
28.   It is, thus, noted that in the present case, the respondent no. 2
                          had withdrawn his earlier complaint i.e. Ct. Cases 5786/2018, only
                          qua accused no. 3, purely on the grounds of lack of jurisdiction of the
                          learned Magistrate in Saket Courts to adjudicate a case related to a
                          sitting MLA, who is also the Chief Minister of Delhi. In this regard,
                          this Court also takes note of the fact that pursuant to directions
                          passed by the Hon‟ble Apex Court in case of Ashvini Kumar
                          Upadhyay vs. Union of India & Anr. W.P. (C) 699/2016, a
                          notification no. 35/DHC/Gaz./G-1/VI.E.2(a)/2018 dated 23.02.2018
                          was issued by this Court constituting special Courts to deal with
                          cases against sitting/former MPs/MLAs.
29.   As regards the argument regarding applicability of
Section 257
of Cr.P.C., it is important to note that the case i.e. Ct. Cases
                          5786/2018, at the time when complaint qua petitioner herein was
                          withdrawn, was still at the stage of recording of pre-summoning
                          evidence. The petitioner i.e. accused was not before the Court
                          concerned, as he had not yet been summoned, and the learned
                          Magistrate had not applied his mind even to the material before him
                          to arrive at a finding as to whether the accused persons were required
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                                  Page 20 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
to be summoned or not. Thus, the trial in that complaint case had not
                          yet begun, when the complaint was withdrawn. Having also gone
                          through the decision of this Court in case of
Satish Dayal Mathur
(supra), this Court is of the opinion the learned MM-01, South-East,
                          Saket Court, Delhi did not have the jurisdiction to adjudicate
                          complaint case pertaining to the present petitioner, in view of Special
                          Courts constituted by this Court for the purpose of dealing with cases
                          pertaining to sitting/former MPs/MLAs. In view thereof, the learned
                          Magistrate himself did not pass any order of acquittal of the accused
                          no. 3 i.e. petitioner herein. Thus, this Court is of the opinion that such
                          a case would not be covered within the provisions of
Section 257
of
                          Cr.P.C., which falls under Chapter XX i.e. „Trial of Summons-Cases
                          By Magistrates‟. Even otherwise, as observed hereinabove, the case
                          of the complainant qua the present petitioner, being a sitting MLA,
                          could not have been dealt with by the Magistrate concerned.
II.   THE OFFENCE OF DEFAMATION
30.   As the present case revolves around the offence of defamation,
                          it shall be necessary to first examine and analyse the concept of
                          defamation and defamatory statements, essential ingredients to
                          constitute this offence under
Section 499
of IPC and the judicial
                          precedents highlighting the role of courts while issuing summons to
                          an accused in a complaint filed for offence of defamation.
Meaning and Definition
31.   According to Halsbury's Laws of England, Fourth Edition,
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                             Page 21 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
Volume 28, the term 'defamatory statement' has been defined as "a
                          statement which tends to lower a person in the estimation of right
                          thinking members of the society generally or to cause him to be
                          shunned or avoided or to expose him to hatred, contempt or ridicule,
                          or to convey an imputation on him disparaging or injurious to him in
                          his office, profession, calling trade or business".
32.   The Black's Law Dictionary, 4th Ed., explains the meaning of
                          „defamation‟ as "the taking from one‟s reputation. The offense of
                          injuring a person‟s character, fame, or reputation by false and
                          malicious statements".
33.   In addition, P.H. Winfield in A Textbook of the Law of Tort,
                          5th Ed. 1950, defines „defamation‟ as "the publication of a statement
                          which tends to lower a person in the estimation of right-thinking
                          members of society generally; or which tends to make them shun or
                          avoid that person".
34.   As per R.F.V. Heuston, Salmond on the Law of Torts, 17th Ed.
                          1977, the wrong of defamation "consists in the publication of a false
                          and defamatory statement concerning another person without lawful
                          justification. That person must be in being. Hence not only does an
                          action of defamation not survive for or against the estate of a
                          deceased person, but a statement about a deceased or unborn person
                          is not actionable at the suit of his relatives, however great their pain
                          and distress, unless the statement is in some way defamatory of
                          them".
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                           Page 22 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
Provisions of Law
35.   The offence of defamation has been defined under
Section 499
of IPC, which reads as under:
"499. Defamation.--Whoever, by words either spoken or
                                    intended to be read, or by signs or by visible
                                    representations, makes or publishes any imputation
                                    concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or
                                    having reason to believe that such imputation will harm,
                                    the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases
                                    hereinafter excepted, to defame that person.
                                    Explanation 1.--It may amount to defamation to impute
                                    anything to a deceased person, if the imputation would
                                    harm the reputation of that person if living, and is intended
                                    to be hurtful to the feelings of his family or other near
                                    relatives.
Explanation 2.--It may amount to defamation to make an
                                    imputation concerning a company or an association or
                                    collection of persons as such.
Explanation 3.--An imputation in the form of an
                                    alternative or expressed ironically, may amount to
                                    defamation.
Explanation 4.--No imputation is said to harm a person's
                                    reputation, unless that imputation directly or indirectly, in
                                    the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual
                                    character of that person, or lowers the character of that
                                    person in respect of his caste or of his calling, or lowers
                                    the credit of that person, or causes it to be believed that the
                                    body of that person is in a loathsome state, or in a state
                                    generally considered as disgraceful.
First Exception.--Imputation of truth which public good
                                    requires to be made or published.--It is not defamation to
                                    impute anything which is true concerning any person, if it
                                    be for the public good that the imputation should be made
                                    or published. Whether or not it is for the public good is a
                                    question of fact.
Second Exception.--Public conduct of public servants.--It
                                    is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion
                                    whatever respecting the conduct of a public servant in the
                                    discharge of his public functions, or respecting his
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                                      Page 23 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
character, so far as his character appears in that conduct,
                                    and no further.
Third Exception.--Conduct of any person touching any
                                    public question.--It is not defamation to express in good
                                    faith any opinion whatever respecting the conduct of any
                                    person touching any public question, and respecting his
                                    character, so far as his character appears in that conduct,
                                    and no further.
Fourth Exception.--Publication of reports of proceedings
                                    of courts.--It is not defamation to publish substantially
                                    true report of the proceedings of a Court of Justice, or of
                                    the result of any such proceedings.
Explanation.--A Justice of the Peace or other officer
                                    holding an enquiry in open Court preliminary to a trial in a
                                    Court of Justice, is a Court within the meaning of the
                                    above section.
Fifth Exception.--Merits of case decided in Court or
                                    conduct of witnesses and others concerned.--It is not
                                    defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever
                                    respecting the merits of any case, civil or criminal, which
                                    has been decided by a Court of Justice, or respecting the
                                    conduct of any person as a party, witness or agent, in any
                                    such case, or respecting the character of such person, as far
                                    as his character appears in that conduct, and no further.
                                    Sixth Exception.--Merits of public performance.--It is not
                                    defamation to express in good faith any opinion respecting
                                    the merits of any performance which its author has
                                    submitted to the judgment of the public, or respecting the
                                    character of the author so far as his character appears in
                                    such performance, and no further.
Explanation.--A performance may be submitted to the
                                    judgment of the public expressly or by acts on the part of
                                    the author which imply such submission to the judgment
                                    of the public.
Seventh Exception.--Censure passed in good faith by
                                    person having lawful authority over another.--It is not
                                    defamation in a person having over another any authority,
                                    either conferred by law or arising out of a lawful contract
                                    made with that other, to pass in good faith any censure on
                                    the conduct of that other in matters to which such lawful
                                    authority relates.
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                                    Page 24 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
Eighth Exception.--Accusation preferred in good faith to
                                    authorised person.--It is not defamation to prefer in good
                                    faith an accusation against any person to any of those who
                                    have lawful authority over that person with respect to the
                                    subject-matter of accusation.
Ninth Exception.--Imputation made in good faith by
                                    person for protection of his or other's interests.--It is not
                                    defamation to make an imputation on the character of
                                    another provided that the imputation be made in good faith
                                    for the protection of the interests of the person making it,
                                    or of any other person, or for the public good.
                                    Tenth Exception.--Caution intended for good of person to
                                    whom conveyed or for public good.-- It is not defamation
                                    to convey a caution, in good faith, to one person against
                                    another, provided that such caution be intended for the
                                    good of the person to whom it is conveyed, or of some
                                    person in whom that person is interested, or for the public
                                    good.
36.
Section 500
of IPC, which provides for punishment for
                          defamation, reads as under:
"500. Whoever defames another shall be punished with
                                    simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two
                                    years, or with fine, or with both."
Essential Ingredients to Constitute Offence of Defamation
37.
In case of
Jeffrey J. Diermeier v. State of W.B.
(2010) 6 SCC
                          243, the Hon‟ble Apex Court had observed that to constitute
                          defamation under
Section 499
of IPC, the following ingredients must
                          be fulfilled:
"29. To constitute "defamation" under
Section 499
IPC,
                                    there must be an imputation and such imputation must
                                    have been made with the intention of harming or knowing
                                    or having reason to believe that it will harm the reputation
                                    of the person about whom it is made. In essence, the
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                                   Page 25 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
offence of defamation is the harm caused to the reputation
                                    of a person. It would be sufficient to show that the accused
                                    intended or knew or had reason to believe that the
                                    imputation made by him would harm the reputation of the
                                    complainant, irrespective of whether the complainant
                                    actually suffered directly or indirectly from the imputation
                                    alleged."
38.   The Hon‟ble Apex Court in case of
Subramanian Swamy v.
                          Union of India
(2016) 7 SCC 221, while analysing the
                          constitutionality of offence of defamation, had also enumerated the
                          essentials of
Section 499
of IPC, which are as under:
"168. For the aforesaid purpose, it is imperative to analyse
                                    in detail what constitutes the offence of "defamation" as
                                    provided under
Section 499
IPC. To constitute the offence,
                                    there has to be imputation and it must have been made in
                                    the manner as provided in the provision with the intention
                                    of causing harm or having reason to believe that such
                                    imputation will harm the reputation of the person about
                                    whom it is made. Causing harm to the reputation of a
                                    person is the basis on which the offence is founded and
                                    mens rea is a condition precedent to constitute the said
                                    offence. The complainant has to show that the accused had
                                    intended or known or had reason to believe that the
                                    imputation made by him would harm the reputation of the
                                    complainant. The criminal offence emphasises on the
                                    intention or harm.
Section 44
IPC defines "injury". It
                                    denotes any harm whatever illegally caused to any per-son,
                                    in body, mind, reputation or property. Thus, the word
                                    "injury" encapsulates harm caused to the reputation of any
                                    person. It also takes into account the harm caused to a
                                    person's body and mind. Section 499 provides for harm
                                    caused to the reputation of a person, that is, the
                                    complainant."
39.   The Hon‟ble Apex Court in
Google India Private Limited v.
                          Visakha Industries and Ors.
(2020) 4 SCC 162 had also examined
                          the ingredients of Section 499 as well as the meaning of terms
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                                   Page 26 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
"making of an imputation" and "publishing of an imputation". The
                          relevant observations in this regard are reproduced hereunder:
"105. Under the said provision, the Law Giver has made
                                    the making or publishing of any imputation with a
                                    requisite intention or knowledge or reason to believe, as
                                    provided therein, that the imputation will harm the
                                    reputation of any person, the essential ingredients of the
                                    offence of defamation. What is the meaning to be attached
                                    to the words "making of an imputation" and "publishing of
                                    an imputation"? This question has been set out with clarity
                                    in a recent judgment which is reported in
Mohd. Abdulla
                                    Khan v. Prakash K.
(2018) 1 SCC 615. It was held as
                                    follows:
10. An analysis of the above reveals that to constitute
                                       an offence of defamation it requires a person to make
                                       some imputation concerning any other person;
(i) Such imputation must be made either
(a) With intention, or
(b) Knowledge, or
(c) Having a reason to believe
                                       that such an imputation will harm the reputation of the
                                       person against whom the imputation is made.
(ii) Imputation could be, by
(a) Words, either spoken or written, or
(b) By making signs, or
(c) Visible representations
(iii) Imputation could be either made or published.
                                       The difference between making of an imputation and
                                       publishing the same is:
If 'X' tells 'Y' that 'Y' is a criminal -- 'X' makes an
                                       imputation.
If 'X' tells 'Z' that 'Y' is a criminal -- 'X' publishes the
                                       imputation.
The essence of publication in the context of Section
                                       499 is the communication of defamatory imputation
                                       to persons other than the persons against whom the
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                                      Page 27 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
imputation is made."
(Emphasis supplied)
40.   Therefore, the essence of „publication‟ of a content which is
                          defamatory in nature, for the purpose of applicability of
Section 499
of IPC, is the „communication‟ of such defamatory content to persons
                          other than the person who is being defamed.
41.   To reiterate once again, in today‟s world, when the law with
                          regard to posting of a defamatory content by way of re-tweeting or
                          reposting is still not settled and is evolving, the Court has to
                          adjudicate a case on the basis of test of a reasonable common man
                          and the social background of the parties concerned alongwith the
                          relevant facts and circumstances of the case which will become the
                          edifice of finding for the purpose of evolving jurisprudence in the
                          field of law, not yet effectively treaded or adjudicated upon.
Issuance of Process/Summons vis-a-vis Offence of Defamation:
Material Considerations
42.   The Hon‟ble Apex Court in the case of
Iveco Magirus
                          Brandschutztechnik GMBH v. Nirmal Kishore Bhartiya and Ors
2023 SCC OnLine SC 1258, after considering several judicial
                          precedents, had made the following observations on the issue of
                          summoning an accused for an offence of defamation:
"44. Thus, when a Magistrate taking cognisance of an
                                    offence proceeds Under Section 200 based on a prima
                                    facie satisfaction that a criminal offence is made out, he
                                    is required to satisfy himself by looking into the
                                    allegations levelled in the complaint, the statements
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                                 Page 28 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
made by the complainant in support of the complaint,
                                    the documentary evidence in support of the allegations,
                                    if any, produced by him as well as statements of any
                                    witness the complainant may choose to produce to
                                    stand by the allegations in the complaint. Although we
                                    are not concerned with Section 202 here, if an inquiry or
                                    an investigation is conducted thereunder, it goes without
                                    saying that the reports should also be looked into by the
                                    Magistrate before issuing process Under Section 204.
                                    However, there can be no gainsaying that at the stage the
                                    Magistrate decides to pass an order summoning the
                                    Accused, examination of the nature
referred to above
ought not to be intended for forming an opinion as to
                                    whether the materials are sufficient for a 'conviction';
                                    instead, he is required to form an opinion whether the
                                    materials are sufficient for 'proceeding' as the title of the
                                    relevant chapter would indicate. Since the Accused does
                                    not enter the arena at that stage, question of the Accused
                                    raising a defence to thwart issuance of process does not
                                    arise. Nonetheless, the fact that the Accused is not before
                                    the Magistrate does not mean that the Magistrate need not
                                    apply his judicial mind. Nothing in the applicable law
                                    prevents the Magistrate from applying his judicial mind to
                                    other provisions of law and to ascertain whether, prima
                                    facie, an "offence", as defined in
Section 2(n)
of the Code
                                    of Criminal Procedure is made out. Without such opinion
                                    being formed, question of "proceeding" as in Section 204
                                    does not arise. What the law imposes on the Magistrate as
                                    a requirement is that he is bound to consider only such of
                                    the materials that are brought before him in terms of
                                    Sections 200 and 202 as well as any applicable provision
                                    of a statute, and what is imposed as a restriction by law on
                                    him is that he is precluded from considering any material
                                    not brought on the record in a manner permitted by the
                                    legal process. As a logical corollary to the above
                                    proposition, what follows is that the Magistrate while
                                    deciding whether to issue process is entitled to form a
                                    view looking into the materials before him. If, however,
                                    such materials themselves disclose a complete defence
                                    under any of the Exceptions, nothing prevents the
                                    Magistrate upon application of judicial mind to accord the
                                    benefit of such Exception to prevent a frivolous complaint
                                    from triggering an unnecessary trial. Since initiation of
                                    prosecution is a serious matter, we are minded to say that
                                    it would be the duty of the Magistrate to prevent false and
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                                    Page 29 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
frivolous complaints eating up precious judicial time. If
                                    the complaint warrants dismissal, the Magistrate is
                                    statutorily mandated to record his brief reasons. On the
                                    contrary, if from such materials a prima facie
                                    satisfaction is reached upon application of judicial
                                    mind of an "offence" having been committed and there
                                    being sufficient ground for proceeding, the Magistrate
                                    is under no other fetter from issuing process.
Upon a
                                    prima facie case being made out and even though much
                                    can be said on both sides, the Magistrate would have no
                                    option but to commit an Accused for trial, as held in
Chandra Deo Singh
(supra) ......
45. In the context of a complaint of defamation, at the
                                    stage the Magistrate proceeds to issue process, he has
                                    to form his opinion based on the allegations in the
                                    complaint and other material (obtained through the
                                    process referred to in Section 200/Section 202) as to
                                    whether 'sufficient ground for proceeding' exists as
                                    distinguished from 'sufficient ground for conviction',
                                    which has to be left for determination at the trial and
                                    not at the stage when process is issued. Although there is
                                    nothing in the law which in express terms mandates the
                                    Magistrate to consider whether any of the Exceptions to
Section 499
, Indian Penal Code is attracted, there is no bar
                                    either. After all, what is 'excepted' cannot amount to
                                    defamation on the very terms of the provision. We do
                                    realize that more often than not, it would be difficult to
                                    form an opinion that an Exception is attracted at that
                                    juncture because neither a complaint for defamation
                                    (which is not a regular phenomenon in the criminal
                                    courts) is likely to be drafted with contents, nor are
                                    statements likely to be made on oath and evidence
                                    adduced, giving an escape route to the Accused at the
                                    threshold. However, we hasten to reiterate that it is not
                                    the law that the Magistrate is in any manner precluded
                                    from considering if at all any of the Exceptions is attracted
                                    in a given case; the Magistrate is under no fetter from so
                                    considering, more so because being someone who is
                                    legally trained, it is expected that while issuing process he
                                    would have a clear idea of what constitutes defamation. If,
                                    in the unlikely event, the contents of the complaint and the
                                    supporting statements on oath as well as reports of
                                    investigation/inquiry reveal a complete defence under any
                                    of the Exceptions to
Section 499
, Indian Penal Code, the
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                                    Page 30 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
Magistrate, upon due application of judicial mind, would
                                    be justified to dismiss the complaint on such ground and it
                                    would not amount to an act in excess of jurisdiction if such
                                    dismissal has the support of reasons."
III.   BALANCING              CRITICAL            YET         COMPETING
                          INTERESTS: FREEDOM OF SPEECH & EXPRESSION Vs.
                          PROTECTING A PERSON FROM REPUTATIONAL INJURY
43.    Reputation is a form of honor and honor has many aspects.
                          The recognition of reputation as a significant social asset is
                          fundamental, and the Courts play an important role in ensuring
                          equal protection to every individual, regardless of their standing
                          in society.
44.    By analysing the limited sphere of jurisprudence evolved till
                          date regarding „retweet‟ or „repost‟ being covered under meaning of
                          „publication‟, this Court would note that the law on defamation on
                          the one hand protects one person's reputation who is the
                          complainant and one person's fundamental right who has been
                          alleged to be an accused to freedom of expression. Freedom of
                          expression and the use of cyberspace and social media for the said
                          purpose, especially by persons who hold positions of authority and
                          have huge following on their social media accounts, needs to be kept
                          in mind while balancing the contrasting approaches to be adopted
                          towards both the parties, when they come to a Court to determine
                          their rights.
45.    In addressing a democratic community, it is crucial to
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                                   Page 31 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
emphasize that freedom of speech, while a fundamental right,
                          does not grant individuals the license to inflict harm or tarnish
                          the reputation of others. This distinction becomes particularly
                          pertinent when grappling with the court's dilemma of striking a
                          balance between the cherished value of free expression and the
                          equally essential need to protect an individual's reputation.
46.   Thus, a Court, while weighing the value of reputation of one
                          party and freedom of expression of the other, has to keep in mind that
                          in a democratic setup, a person who is complainant in such cases may
                          be vulnerable in a given set of circumstances in face of his
                          competing interest with that of the accused. The principle of equal
                          protection under the law mandates that the courts consider the plight
                          of every individual, regardless of their societal status. In rendering
                          equal protection, the court must balance the right of free speech
                          with the need to prevent unjust harm to reputation. The
                          injurious falsehood of a statement will definitely invite
                          defamation and loss of reputation.
47.   Whether a person has achieved great heights in society, or
                          finds himself marginalised considering himself as the last and
                          least in terms of access to Court of law to fight for safeguarding
                          his reputation, their right to fair treatment and protection from
                          unwarranted harm remains paramount before any Court of law
                          while adjudicating. This approach and duty becomes more
                          critical when the complainant may be pitted against a person
                          who may have more power, influence and followers.
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                         Page 32 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
IV. MEETING THE CHALLENGE OF ADJUDICATING
                          GREY AREA OF LAW NOT YET EFFECTIVELY
                          ADJUDICATED UPON: LAYING FOUNDATION STONE OF
                          JURISPRUDENCE
48.     The evolution of technology and all pervasive influence of
                          social media have transformed the landscape through which
                          reputational harm can occur. As communication has shifted from
                          traditional forms of speech to the digital space, the law must adapt to
                          effectively addressing the new weapons of harm to reputation,
                          particularly in the context of posts and reposts on social media
                          platforms. Unlike private conversations, digital content posted and
                          reposted on social media has the potential for immediate and
                          widespread dissemination. The virality and permanence of online
                          content amplifies its impact, making it a tool for causing reputational
                          harm.
49.     The use of cyberspace, as in the present case - the social media
                          platform of Twitter (now 'X'), has seen rapid development. The users
                          of cyberspace, for the purpose of posting their content even by way
                          of re-tweeting, should remain conscious of a keen sense of danger in
                          this new technological method of spreading information and ideas.
                          The content shared at such platforms spreads rapidly, and any
                          content involving the reputation of a person will attract
                          considerable harm in case he is negatively portrayed on the basis
                          of a content which is scandalous or indictable.
50.     Twitter (now 'X'), as a platform, serves as a megaphone
                          that amplifies messages and broadcasts them to an extensive
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                           Page 33 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
audience. It provides the ability to communicate with millions of
                          people at the stroke of a button. The immediacy and accessibility
                          of social media means that defamatory statements disseminated
                          through tweets can rapidly reach individuals worldwide. The
                          audience includes not only followers of the public figure but also
                          anyone who has access to the social media platform and who may
                          come across or be exposed to the tweet. Words which are posted,
                          which may be these days in the form of a video also, will amount to
                          publication and will be actionable in case it contains defamatory
                          content or malice. Needless to say, the extensive circulation of such
                          content in public can cause considerable injury to a person‟s
                          reputation. Such written and posted content has the inherent quality
                          of being permanent by virtue of the fact that a man‟s reputation
                          suffers while the video remains available on the public platform and
                          in the cyber space.
51.   The number of followers or the reach of an individual's online
                          presence can significantly magnify the impact of a post or repost. As
                          a result, the law needs to evolve to navigate the complexities of this
                          digital era. The concept of publication, traditionally associated
                          with printed materials, must be re-examined in the context of
                          virtual platforms where information can reach a vast audience in
                          seconds. Moreover, the legal system should be attuned to the
                          dynamics of social media influence.
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                         Page 34 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
Pace of Spread of Scandalous Content: From the Echo of
                          Whispers in Pre-Digital Era compared to the Spread at Lightning
                          Speed of Digital Dissemination in Digital Era
52.   While deciding such cases, the Courts have to realize that in
                          this advanced age of technology, the content of defamation which is
                          scandalous in nature, spreads like a wildfire, leading to instant
                          injury to reputation of a person by sheer extent of its reach to millions
                          within minutes and is not like whispered scandal of the previous past.
53.   In other words, when a public figure tweets a defamatory
                          post, the ramifications extend far beyond a mere whisper in
                          someone's ears. In social media, where information travels at
                          lightning speed and has the potential to reach a global audience, the
                          act of tweeting transforms the communication into a form of public
                          publication. The audience, in this context, is not restricted to those
                          physically present or within immediate earshot but encompasses the
                          vast and diverse online community. In the digital age, the
                          boundaries of 'publication' have expanded, and the implications
                          of defamation are heightened due to the potential of widespread
                          dissemination.
54.   The force of causing injury to reputation in virtual realms
                          can be particularly potent, with the impact transcending physical
                          boundaries and reaching a global audience. The virtual space
                          provides a platform where individuals, especially those with
                          significant influence, can disseminate information rapidly, leading to
                          swift and widespread consequences for a person's reputation.
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                            Page 35 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
55.   The force of a virtual blow is often exemplified by the sheer
                          number of followers an individual commands on digital
                          platforms. The larger the following, the greater the potential reach
                          and influence of their virtual actions. In the virtual realm, a damaging
                          statement or action can reverberate across social media, online
                          forums, and other digital spaces, magnifying its impact on the
                          targeted individual's reputation.
56.   Unlike physical injury, which may be localized and limited
                          in scope, virtual injury can have far-reaching and long-lasting
                          effects. The force of a virtual blow is intricately tied to the
                          dynamics of online engagement, where the virality and
                          permanence of digital content contribute to the enduring nature
                          of reputational harm.
57.   Recognizing and addressing virtual injury requires an
                          understanding of the power dynamics inherent in the digital
                          landscape. Legal frameworks and societal norms must adapt to
                          consider the implications of reputational harm inflicted through
                          virtual modes, acknowledging the influence exerted by individuals
                          with substantial online followings.
V.    'RETWEETING'           A      DEFAMATORY        IMPUTATION
                          WILL AMOUNT TO 'PUBLICATION' FOR THE PURPOSE
                          OF APPLICABILITY OF SECTION 499 OF
IPC
58.   When a person makes a smart move to dodge law, the
                          Courts and the laws have to be smarter to catch that smartness.
                          Courts play a pivotal role in this process, acting as the vanguards of
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                           Page 36 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
justice. They must not only interpret the law but also possess the
                          foresight to anticipate evolving strategies aimed at circumventing
                          legal consequences.
59.   It has to be noted that a person retweeting a defamatory
                          content, which has the potential of causing reputational injury to a
                          person, cannot wriggle out of his responsibility by merely contending
                          that it was a retweet and not the original tweet. Accepting this view
                          as canvassed by the petitioner would amount to permitting people to
                          retweet any objectionable or defamatory content in cyberspace and
                          social media platforms, without any responsibility being attached to
                          their act of posting such content on social media even if the content
                          has the potential to cause reputational injury to another.
60.   The retweeting of the content in the present case which was
                          originally created by some other person who did not have as much
                          public following as the present petitioner, by virtue of the petitioner
                          retweeting that content, represented to the public at large that he
                          believed the content created by another person to be true. It has to be
                          held so since the general public would ordinarily believe that the
                          person retweeting such content on his own Twitter account, must
                          have understood, verified and believed the content to be true. The
                          critical issue to be taken note of in such circumstances is the fact that
                          the petitioner who retweeted the content had much larger following
                          than the original content creator, thus, having multiplied potential of
                          spreading the defamatory content to a much larger audience.
61.   The freedom of expression is essential in a democratic setup
                          to spread one's opinion, however, it cannot extend to the extent of
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                            Page 37 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
affecting the right of the people not to be defamed.
62.   In case, the act of retweeting or reposting is allowed to be
                          misused since it is still considered to be a vacant grey area of law
                          where the sapling of jurisprudence as to whether retweeting
                          defamatory content will be considered publication or not is yet to
                          take place, it will encourage people with ill intentions to misuse
                          this vacant field of law and therefore, despite retweeting the
                          defamatory content, the accused can thereafter conveniently take
                          a plea that he had merely retweeted a content.
63.   In this background, this Court holds that retweeting or
                          reposting defamatory content, without any disclaimer as to whether
                          the person so retweeting agrees or disagrees or has verified the
                          content so posted or not, and as to whether he projected to the world
                          at large, who care to follow him, that he believes the content to be
                          true so shared, a person would be republishing the original
                          defamatory content which has the potential of lowering the moral or
                          intellectual character or credit of a person.
64.   A sense of responsibility has to be attached while retweeting
                          content about which one does not have knowledge. Since in case
                          reputational injury is caused by defaming a person, the person doing
                          so by retweeting must attract penal, civil or tort action against him in
                          absence of any disclaimer.
65.   If we assume that the law exclusively attributes harm to the
                          original author of a post in cases of defamation, a potential loophole
                          emerges. Any case has to be adjudicated in its accompanying
                          circumstances and the background of not only the facts but the actors
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                           Page 38 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
of the act in question. When a vast majority follows a particular
                          person on twitter, not all, may be aware of the nitty gritties of tweets
                          or retweets. Most common persons who follow a person, who may be
                          an influencer for a particular segment of community will find it
                          enough reason to believe a content just because the content is posted
                          on account of a particular person.
66.   This Court, while trying to lay down foundational stone on
                          jurisprudence of retweeting, and whether it amounts to publication
                          or not for the purpose of
Section 499
of IPC, presents the following
                          scenario to explain the reasons weighing in this Court‟s mind as to
                          why this Court holds that retweeting amounts to publication for the
                          purpose of
Section 499
of IPC:
Consider an individual, Z, who commands a specific group of
                                followers, who regularly engage with his tweets. Z could
                                potentially evade legal repercussions by instructing one of his
                                followers to post defamatory content or by creating a fake
                                account for the same purpose. Subsequently, the content is re-
                                posted on Z‟s account, garnering a substantial audience. In
                                such a scenario, the crux of the concern lies in the fact that if
                                the law only holds the original author accountable, it creates an
                                avenue for individuals like Z to escape the clutches of law.
                                Despite being the one actively disseminating the defamatory
                                material on his account, Z might escape punishment if the
                                focus is solely on the initial creator of the content. If the law
                                fails to address situations where the true culprit is the one
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                           Page 39 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
amplifying and re-posting defamatory content, it undermines
                                the very purpose of defamation laws that is to protect
                                individuals from false and damaging statements.
67.   Therefore, this Court is of the view that rigours of
Section 499
of IPC will be attracted prima facie in case a person will
                          retweet/repost the alleged defamatory remarks or content, for the
                          purpose of the general public to see, appreciate and believe.
68.   This can also be explained by way of following illustrations,
                          which weigh in the mind of this Court and have been purely created
                          by this Court for the purpose of explanation, which are not
                          exhaustive but suggestive in nature:
Illustrations By This Court
(a) B posts defamatory content about Z on his social media
                                account. A, reposts the defamatory content, disseminating
                                it to a larger audience. The act of both A and B is
                                defamation, unless it falls within one of the exceptions or
                                A posts a disclaimer in the repost that the content has not
                                been verified regarding its correctness/ genuineness.
(b) B, a well-known influencer, shares a false accusation
                                against Z on her blog. A, a follower, reblogs the content,
                                amplifying its reach. A's and B's act constitutes defamation,
                                unless it falls within one of the exceptions, or A posts a
                                disclaimer in the retweet that the content has not been
                                verified regarding its correctness/ genuineness.
(c) B tweets derogatory statements about Z, a public figure.
A, another user, retweets B's content, making it visible to a
                                broader audience. A's and B's action is defamation, unless
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                            Page 40 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
it falls within one of the exceptions or A posts a disclaimer
                                in the retweet that the content has not been verified
                                regarding its correctness/ genuineness.
(d) B publishes a misleading article about Z on an online
                                forum. A, a forum member, reposts the article,
                                contributing to its wider circulation. A's and B's action is
                                defamation, unless it falls within one of the exceptions or
                                A posts a disclaimer in the repost that the content has not
                                been verified regarding its correctness/ genuineness.
(e) B uploads an edited video falsely portraying Z engaging
                                in inappropriate behavior. A, a subscriber, shares the same
                                video on a video-sharing platform, expanding its
                                viewership. A's and B's action is defamation, unless it falls
                                within one of the exceptions or A posts a disclaimer while
                                sharing the video that the content has not been verified
                                regarding its correctness/ genuineness.
VI.   REACH          &   INFLUENCE          OF      THE       PERSON
                          RETWEETING DEFAMATORY CONTENT
69.   The assertion that the petitioner simply retweeted defamatory
                          content without any intention to harm the reputation of the
                          respondent no. 2 raises a complex legal issue, especially considering
                          the political standing and maturity of the petitioner, who also
                          holds the position of Chief Minister of the State of Delhi.
70.   The background of the petitioner, being a Chief Minister,
                          necessitates an acknowledgment of the inherent sense of
                          responsibility that comes with such a significant political role. As
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                            Page 41 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
a leader with political standing and maturity, the petitioner is
                          presumed to be aware of the potential impact of his actions,
                          including retweets, on the public perception. When a public
                          figure, particularly one with a political standing, tweets or
                          retweets a defamatory post, the stakes and repercussions escalate
                          given the broader implications on society. The audience,
                          therefore, becomes the citizenry at large, whose opinions and
                          decisions may be influenced by the information they consume,
                          including defamatory statements published on social media.
71.   In other words, the argument of mere retweeting without
                          harmful intent has to be weighed against a public figure‟s duty to
                          exercise due diligence and care in disseminating information on
                          social media platforms.
72.   Where millions of people follow a particular person such as
                          the petitioner herein on social media platforms such as Twitter
                          (now 'X'), anything which is posted by the petitioner on his
                          account is for public notice i.e. notice for all the people who care
                          to follow him.
VII. WILL        EVERY     'RETWEET'        ATTRACT        ACTION
                          UNDER SECTION 499 OF
IPC
?
73.   Let us consider a scenario where an original author „Z‟ posts
                          defamatory content against „Y‟ on his Twitter (now 'X') account. The
                          same is retweeted by thousands of users on their profiles. However,
                          interestingly, one such retweet is from a public figure or influencer
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                         Page 42 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
with over 10 million followers, whereas the rest of retweets are from
                          those who do not command such levels of popularity. Now, would
                          every such person who retweets the defamatory content, be liable to
                          face action for defamation?
74.   In this Court‟s opinion, while all acts of „retweeting‟ may
                          amount to „publication‟ of defamatory imputation, the extent of harm
                          caused to the reputation of the aggrieved person would depend on the
                          level of influence and the potential reach of the individual who
                          retweets such defamatory imputation.
75.   To illustrate, the reputational harm caused by virtue of
                          retweeting defamatory content, by a person with a mere 10 followers,
                          in contrast to another individual with a substantial following of over
                          10 million, would be undoubtedly different. The gravity of the
                          situation would also differ substantially in such cases especially in
                          view of explanation 4 of
Section 499
of IPC which clearly provides
                          that for an imputation to be defamatory in nature so as to harm‟s one
                          reputation, it must inter alia directly or indirectly, in the estimation of
                          others, lowers the moral or intellectual character or credit of the
                          person who is being defamed.
76.   Therefore, the social media reach as well as the social and
                          political standing of the person, retweeting the defamatory
                          imputation, is of great relevance. If a public figure with a millions
                          of followers retweets any defamatory content, the impact on the
                          aggrieved person‟s reputation and his character will be much greater,
                          since the larger audience and the influence wielded by a public figure
                          would amplify the spread and longevity of the defamatory content.
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                              Page 43 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
Such a person's influence may also make his audience believe the
                          defamatory content to be true, thereby lowering the reputation of the
                          aggrieved person.
77.   Conversely, if a defamatory imputation is retweeted by an
                          individual with negligible followers or very limited influence, the
                          impact on the complainant's reputation may be less severe or may not
                          even be of a nature to fall within the ambit of offence of defamation,
                          since the limited or negligible reach of such a person would reduce
                          the potential for the defamatory content to gain any significance
                          among the right thinking members of the society, this of course,
                          would be a matter of trial as to whether a person‟s retweet of
                          defamatory content, with following of ten persons or zero persons
                          would be sufficient to attract action under
Section 499
of IPC.
78.   If one analyses the facts of the present case in light of aforesaid
                          observations, it is to be noted that in this case also, the respondent no.
                          2 had examined two witnesses at the pre-summoning stage who had
                          deposed that they followed the present petitioner on Twitter, and they
                          had seen the YouTube video which the petitioner had retweeted on
                          his Twitter account, and after hearing the allegations contained in that
                          video against the respondent no. 2 herein, they had immediately
                          called respondent no. 2 to express their dismay.
79.   Certainly, the harm inflicted upon the reputation of respondent
                          no. 2, as claimed, by the actions of the petitioner herein, who not only
                          commands a substantial social media following but also holds the
                          position of the Chief Minister of Delhi, would be exponentially more
                          than that resulting from thousands of retweets by other social media
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                             Page 44 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
users. Thus, the petitioner herein cannot take a defence that the
                          complainant had chosen only to prosecute him for retweeting the
                          alleged defamatory imputation, even though several other thousands
                          of social media users had retweeted the same original tweet
                          containing hyperlink/URL of defamatory video.
80.   Therefore, though every 'retweet' of defamatory imputation
                          would ordinarily amount to 'publication' under
Section 499
of
                          IPC, it is ultimately for the person so aggrieved to decide as to
                          which retweet caused more harm to his reputation, and inter alia
                          lowered his moral or intellectual character or his credibility
                          among the members of society. This also will be decided by the
                          learned Trial Court on the basis of material before it as to whether the
                          retweet with its accompanying circumstances had the potential to
                          defame the complainant concerned.
VIII. WHETHER          PETITIONER          IS   LIABLE       TO      BE
                          SUMMONED FOR HIS ACT OF RETWEETING THE
                          ALLEGEDLY DEFAMATORY CONTENT?
81.   In the present case, the petitioner had retweeted the original
                          tweet of Sh. Dhruv Rathee, and the said retweet contained the
                          embedded hyperlink/URL to the allegedly defamatory video which
                          had been uploaded on the YouTube channel owned and run by Sh.
                          Dhruv Rathee.
82.   While the petitioner may plead absence of any malicious
                          intent in the act of retweeting, the Court has to consider the
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                           Page 45 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
responsibility that accompanies the petitioner's political and
                          social standing. Needless to say, the large social media following
                          of a Chief Minister of a State undoubtedly implies a wider reach,
                          making any retweet, a form of public endorsement or
                          acknowledgment.
83.   When a political person of such standing or a public figure or a
                          social influencer, posts some content on his social media account, it
                          can be reasonably believed by the Court while adjudicating such
                          cases, at the initial stage of a case where summoning is in question,
                          that he did understand the repercussions and implications of posting
                          such content and the corresponding harm it can cause to the person
                          aggrieved. In this Court‟s opinion, the online interactions and
                          engagement on Twitter, which involves publication of defamatory
                          statements and content, and sharing such content with others by
                          retweeting will surely attract liability since it would amount to
                          posting defamatory content as one‟s own by believing it to be true
                          and thus, sharing it with the public at large.
84.   The original author of the alleged defamatory content will also
                          be liable for any action if a complaint is filed against him. However,
                          it is the choice of the complainant, who may decide as to whether the
                          person who retweeted such content had caused him more damage or
                          not, since he had more friends or followers, by sharing a content.
85.   In the present case, the defamatory video in question, posted
                          by Sh. Dhruv Rathee and retweeted by the petitioner herein, was
                          aimed at „exposing‟ the IT Cell of BJP and as alleged in the video,
                          the respondent no. 2 was the „second-in-command‟ of the IT Cell of
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                          Page 46 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
BJP and was offering bribes for the purpose of defaming Sh. Dhruv
                          Rathee. Taking note of the same, the argument that the petitioner was
                          not aware that the contents of the material retweeted by him would
                          cause harm to the reputation of the respondent no. 2 cannot be
                          appreciated at the stage of summoning itself, since the adjudication
                          with regard to determination of whether the petitioner herein had
                          acted responsibly or not, and whether as a political person of a long
                          standing, he could have had the knowledge that the content being
                          posted by him would cause defamation or reputational injury to the
                          respondent, is a matter of trial.
86.   Further if, the petitioner herein wants to justify his act by any
                          of the defences or exceptions, it can be done only at an appropriate
                          stage of trial and not when he has just received summons and where
                          prima facie, the case does not fall under any of the exceptions of
Section 499
of IPC. Also, the question regarding an intentional injury
                          or unintentional injury to a complainant‟s reputation by an accused
                          can only be decided during the course of trial by leading evidence by
                          both the parties. To prove actual defamatory injury by impairment of
                          reputation cannot be decided at the threshold of summoning, when
                          only a prima facie view of the matter is to be taken by the learned
                          Magistrate.
87.   The original author of the defamatory content i.e. Sh. Dhruv
                          Rathee alongwith another accused i.e. Sh. Mahavir Prashad are
                          already accused in Ct. Cases 5786/2018, which is pending trial before
                          the learned MM-01, South-East, Saket Court, Delhi.
88.   Further, whether it was his duty or not, as a political person of
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                          Page 47 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
long standing, to have taken some steps to verify the story or
                          allegations against the respondent before posting it on social media,
                          which would make an impact on a huge section of society and
                          corresponding effect on the reputation of the person concerned who
                          is at the centre stage of the defamatory content, will also be
                          considered during the course of trial.
89.   Whether the impugned publication and the alleged
                          defamatory content will help the petitioner as a political person
                          or not, is not in this Court's domain to go into, at this stage.
                          Thus, regardless of whether posting such content or filing a
                          defamation case serves the interests of the petitioner or the
                          respondent in gaining political mileage, this Court must
                          adjudicate a criminal matter solely based on the legal provisions
                          outlined in the relevant sections of criminal law and in
                          accordance with established judicial precedents. The decision
                          should be made without any consideration of personal agendas or
                          the potential impact or implications on the political landscape at
                          the threshold of journey of a case i.e. summoning on the basis of
                          adequate material on record.
90.   The present case is still at the stage of the accused having been
                          summoned. He has challenged the issuance of summons and the
                          summoning order and has raised the issues of illegality in issuance of
                          summons which have been adjudicated upon by this Court in the
                          preceding paragraphs. The issues have been decided against the
                          petitioner herein. Resultantly, this Court finds no reason to interfere
                          with the order of summoning passed by the learned Trial Court. The
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                          Page 48 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
petitioner herein will have opportunity to raise contentions before the
                          learned Trial Court during the course of trial which will be decided as
                          per law, including the issue as to whether for the purpose of trial case
                          under
Section 499
of IPC is made out or not. At this stage, there was
                          sufficient material before the Court concerned to summon the
                          petitioner under
Section 499
of IPC.
91.      It is for the Trial Court Judge to determine at a pre-summoning
                          stage what is capable of being defamatory for the purpose of
                          summoning. Whether the content has been proved to be defamatory
                          or not is a matter of trial.
CONCLUSION
92.      At times, it is difficult to erase the reputational injury from
                          public memory, as the tweets may be deleted but perceptions are
                          difficult to be deleted from the minds of the community.
93.      This Court, thus, for the purpose of adjudicating the present
                          case, holds that retweeting a content, which is allegedly defamatory,
                          on the Twitter account and projecting it to be as if his own views,
                          will prima facie attract the liability under
Section 499
of IPC, for the
                          purpose of issuance of summons.
94.      Therefore, this Court finds no infirmity with the impugned
                          orders passed by the learned Trial Court as well as learned Sessions
                          Court.
95.      Accordingly, the present petition stands dismissed.
96.      It is, however, clarified that the observations made hereinabove
                          qua the present complaint case are solely for the purpose of deciding
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                             Page 49 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50
the instant petition challenging the summoning orders, and the same
                          shall not be construed as opinion of this Court on the merits of the
                          case, which will be adjudicated upon during the course of trial.
97.   The judgment be uploaded on the website forthwith.
SWARANA KANTA SHARMA, J
                          FEBRUARY 5, 2024/ns
Signature Not Verified    CRL.M.C. 6347/2019                                          Page 50 of 50
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:05.02.2024
16:25:50