SOURCE: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/73588823/
SCRAPED: 2026-02-18T10:27:12.960214
TITLE: Full Document
================================================================================

[Cites
38
, Cited by
2
]
Patna High Court
Amar Nath Mahto & Anr vs The State Of Bihar on 1 August, 2017
Author:
Aditya Kumar Trivedi
Bench:
Aditya Kumar Trivedi
Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                    1




            IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA

                              Criminal Appeal (SJ) No.936 of 2016
                       Arising Out of PS.Case No. -57 Year- 2010 Thana -DIGHA District- PATNA
    ===========================================================
    1. Amar Nath Mahto, S/o Late Sita Ram Mahto,
    2. Usha Devi, W/o Mahadeo Mahto, both resident of village-Dighaghat Patlipul,
       P.S. Digha, District-Patna.
                                                             .... .... Appellant/s
                                        Versus
    The State of Bihar
                                                            .... .... Respondent/s
    ===========================================================
    Appearance :
    For the Appellant/s      : Mr. Pramod Kumar-Advocate
    For the Respondent/s     : Mr. Sujit Kumar Singh-A.P.P.
    ===========================================================
    CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ADITYA KUMAR TRIVEDI
                                   CAV JUDGMENT
    Date: 1-08-2017

                         Both the appellants namely Amar Nath Mahto and Usha

        Devi have been found guilty for an offence punishable under
Section

        304B
/
34
of the I.P.C. vide judgment of conviction dated 09.09.2016

        and each one has been sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment

        for 10 years with a further direction to set off in terms of
Section 428
of the Cr.P.C. with regard to custodial period spent during course of

        trial vide order of sentence dated 16.09.2016 passed by the Additional

        Sessions Judge-4th, Patna in Sessions Trial No.1459 of 2013.

                         2. The factual matrix of the case as is evident on the basis

        of the fard-bayan of Saroj Devi (PW-9) on 02.03.2010 at P.M.C.H.

        before police officials of Pirbahore P.S. is that her daughter Aarti

        Devi was married with Dharmendra Mahto, son of Amar Nath Mahto.

        On 19.02.2010 at about 6.00 p.m. father in-law Amar Nath Mahto,
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                  2




        Usha Devi, Fufia Sas and Chachia Sas lit fire over her body after

        sprinkling kerosene oil for the dowry. After coming to know about the

        same, she rushed and found her daughter badly burnt. Till then, her

        son-in-law, who happens to be driver also arrived and then, all of

        them admitted her at P.M.C.H. where she succumbed on 02.03.2010

        during course of treatment. It has also been divulged that statement of

        her daughter had already been recorded by the Pirbahore P.S. at an

        earlier occasion at P.M.C.H. itself. It has also been disclosed that for

        the last three days her son-in-law had also left her daughter.

                         3. The aforesaid fard-bayan was forwarded to Digha P.S.

        on the basis of which, Digha P.S. Case No.57 of 2010 was registered

        on 08.03.2010, followed with an investigation as well as submission

        of chargesheet paving the way of trial, which ultimately concluded

        with finding of guilt and sentence against appellants, put under

        challenge.

                         4. The defence case as is evident from mode of cross-

        examination as well as statement recorded under
Section 313
of the

        Cr.P.C. is that of complete denial of the occurrence in a way as

        narrated by the prosecution. Furthermore, it has also been pleaded that

        deceased set ablaze herself after locking the door under suicidal

        approach out of reason best known to her whereupon was rescued

        after breaking the door, shifted to hospital immediately for treatment
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                        3




        during course of which, unfortunately she died. However, neither oral

        nor documentary evidence has been adduced in support thereof.

                         5. In order to substantiate its case, prosecution had

        examined altogether ten PWs, out of whom, PW-1 Shankar Mahto,

        PW-2 Rajendra Prasad Mehta, PW-3 Kashi Mahto, PW-4 Sanjay

        Kumar @ Sanju, PW-5 Ranjit Mahto @ Ranju, PW-6 Madan Mishra,

        PW-7 Kumari Kanchan Sinha, PW-8 Dr. Arvind Kumar, PW-9 Saroj

        Devi and PW-10 Dharmendra Mahto. Side by side, had also exhibited

        the documents as Exhibit-1 statement of deceased, Aarti Devi, (dying

        declaration), Exhibit-2 and 2/1 post mortem report.

                         6. Though, as per roster appeal of the Year 2015 is being

        taken up for hearing, but considering the legal intricacies involved in

        this appeal so perceived during course of argument having made on

        behalf of appellants over their plea of bail, this appeal has been

        directed to be listed out of turn and accordingly, been heard.

                         7. From the record, it is evident that in the written report,

        there happens to be insertion in different pen concerning dowry

        which, keeping away for a moment, being confronted to the appellant

        on the score that having absence of date of marriage, demand of

        dowry, torture or cruelty meted out to the deceased since before her

        death by husband or relative of the husband, would not have justified

        in sailing of the trial under
Section 304B
/
34
of the I.P.C. and in
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                   4




        likewise manner, the statement of the victim which, on account of her

        death became dying declaration suggesting that on account of

        opposing the lascivious demand of her father-in-law to indulge in

        illicit relationship, she has been put on fire by the accused persons

        coupled with direction of the Hon'ble Apex Court to frame charge in

        an alternative under
Section 302
of the I.P.C., whenever there happens

        to be case of dowry death and for that, the judgment was to be

        circulated to trial Court all over in India in Rajvir @ Raju and

        another vs. State of Haryana reported in (2010) 15 SCC 116, which

        has also been reaffirmed in a case reported in Jasvinder Saini v. State

        (Govt. of NCT of Delhi) reported in (2013) 7 SCC 256, the learned

        counsel for the appellants has been requested to assist the Court in

        order to just decision of the appeal apart from arguing the appeal on

        its merit, how far non-obedience of the direction of the Hon'ble Apex

        Court by the trial Court failing to frame alternative charge which, in

        the facts and circumstances of the case mentioned above, was more

        appropriate followed with remedial steps to be taken thereupon, the

        learned counsel for the appellants as well as learned Additional Public

        Prosecutor lucidly argued the matter.

                         8. Learned counsel for the appellants firstly submitted

        that the judgment impugned on its face suggest that the learned lower

        Court had acted in a mechanical way than judicious manner and that
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                      5




        happens to be reason behind that he failed to appreciate that case of

        the prosecution was deficient relating to the dowry death. To

        substantiate the same, it has been submitted that save and except

        informant, PW-9, none had deposed on that very score. Furthermore,

        other family members of the informant, PW-9 did not oblige her by

        way of their presence during trial. It has also been submitted that her

        evidence       (PW-9)        suffers   from   exaggeration,   contradiction,

        development so much so failed to substantiate the mandatory

        requirement of law in order to constitute a case of dowry death. That

        being so, the conviction and sentence recorded by the learned lower

        Court relating thereto is absurd and fit to be set aside.

                         9. Though the learned counsel for the appellants did not

        opt to enlighten the issue in the light of aforesaid finding of the

        Hon'ble Apex Court. Contrary to it, tried to full advancing alternative

        argument magnifying the deficiencies persisting in the prosecution

        case. It has also been argued that at the present moment, appellate

        Court should not indulge in futile exercise in tracing out the impact

        over trial by non-observance of direction of the Apex Court as such,

        exercise will tantamount to crippling interest of the appellants,

        illegally against the settled principle of law.

                         10. The learned counsel intelligently drew attention

        towards
Section 386
of the Cr.P.C. and submitted that the Appellate
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                   6




        Court during course of exercising such power should firstly consider

        the evidence on record whereupon either acquit or discharge, in case

        the evidence happens to be deficient one. This happens to be intention

        of the legislature, and that happens to be reason behind keeping the

        same at first ladder of exercising the appellate power and if not, then

        other options have been prescribed including that of the re-trial. In toe

        thereof, the learned counsel for the appellants has submitted that

        because of the fact that from the evidence available on the record, no

        case under
Section 304B
/
34
of the I.P.C. is found duly substantiated,

        on account thereof, the judgment impugned should be set aside

        instead of peeping for other option. The other rudimentary issue

        which the Court has perceived on its own after going through the

        record should not be taken as a hurdle in due discharge of appellate

        jurisdiction during course of allowing the appeal. To substantiate such

        plea, relied upon State of Karnataka vs. Dattaraj and others reported

        in A.I.R. 2016 SCW 882.

                         11. It has also been submitted that Appellate Court

        should not make a futile exercise as, such exercise is going to

        jeopardize the interest of the appellants, who happen to be under

        custody for such long period. The situation so visualized is an out

        come of inefficiency of the trial judge, who failed to obey the

        direction of the Hon'ble Apex Court in Rajvir @ Raju and another
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                  7




        vs. State of Haryana reported in (2010) 15 SCC 116, wherein

        appellants have no role to play and so, while considering the event of

        re-trial, the interest of the appellants is also to be seen coupled with

        whether on account of such lapses, miscarriage of justice has really

        occurred.

                         12. The learned counsel for the appellants has drew

        attention over the principle laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in

        State of U.P. vs. Kapil Deo Shukla reported in (1972) 3 SCC 504,

        ...Ramanlal Rathi vs. the State reported in A.I.R. 1951 Calcutta

        305, ...Machander vs. the State of Hyderabad reported in A.I.R.

        1955 SC 792 and submitted that Court neither should act in partial

        manner nor should allow an opportunity to the prosecution to fill up

        lacuna, so persisting. Court has to maintain balance. In likewise

        manner, the learned counsel also urged that accused should not be

        penalized for the lapses having at the end of the Court as well as by

        the prosecution.

                         13. Now, coming to miscarriage of justice, the learned

        counsel for the appellants led much stress over the principle decided

        by the Apex Court reported in Ajay Kumar Ghoshal Etc. vs. State of

        Bihar and another reported in 2017(1) P.L.J.R 458 (SC) and

        submitted that mere omission at the end of trial court would not, in

        ordinary course of nature, suggests miscarriage of justice nor it could
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                 8




        be subject of abhorrence. Miscarriage of justice is an event

        whereunder the whole proceeding is found coloured with some sort of

        illegality adversely affecting upon the mode of trial and in likewise

        manner, its ultimate result. Mere perceiving some sort of deficiency

        while conducting the trial will not cover nor will come within the

        ambit of miscarriage of justice. Apart from this, the learned counsel

        for the appellants also drew attention towards case of Zahira

        Habibulla H. Sheikh and another vs. State of Gujarat and others

        reported in (2004) 4 SCC 158 and submitted that though a caution

        has been given by the Apex Court to the effect that in ordinary course

        of nature, it should not be referred as, the same has been passed

        perceiving extra-ordinary situation persisting, justifying the same

        directing retrial which, in the present facts and circumstances of the

        case, did not find favour. Consequent thereupon, the same could not

        be ordered. So, concluding the submission, has submitted that this

        appeal be allowed after setting aside the judgment of conviction and

        sentence impugned by way of acquitting the appellants.

                         14. On the other hand, the learned Additional Public

        Prosecutor vehemently refuted the submissions having made on

        behalf of appellants. It has been submitted that on account of

        insincerity of the trial Court, the direction given by the Hon'ble Apex

        Court has not been complied with and on account thereof, whole trial
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                   9




        vitiates. The only option now available is to direct the trial Court to

        proceed afresh (de novo trial) after framing alternative charge by

        remitting the matter after setting aside the judgment of conviction and

        sentence impugned. Furthermore, it has also been submitted that had

        there been proper application of judicious mind at the end of the

        learned trial Court at the stage of framing of charge and in likewise

        manner, by conducting prosecutor such mistake would not have

        occurred. That being so, the trial culminated to its logical end in

        illegal manner, whereupon bound to face its ultimate result.

        Furthermore, it has been submitted that present situation is same as

        faced by the Hon'ble Apex Court in Zahira Habibulla H. Sheikh

        and another vs. State of Gujarat and others reported in (2004) 4

        SCC 158, so referred by the learned counsel for the appellants,

        whereupon re-trial is only remedial recourse to be adopted. Learned

        Additional Public Prosecutor further submits that
Section 386
Cr.P.C.

        amply empowers the appellate Court to set right the mistake

        committed by the trial Court, specially
Section 386(e)
Cr.P.C.,

        whereunder appellate Court may make any amendment or any

        consequential or incidental order that may begust and proper apart

        from having been entrusted with directing retrial.

                           15. Giving a pause before coming to discuss the legal

        question involved in this appeal, first of all, glimpse of factual aspect
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                   10




        is to be taken. Apart from evidence of PW-8, Dr. Arbind Kumar, all

        the witnesses including husband (PW-10) have had substantiated the

        cause of death due to ante-mortem burn injury. Furthermore, from the

        evidence of PW-8, it is evident that no cross-examination has been

        made on behalf of appellants in order to challenge the Exhibit-1,

        statement of deceased Aarti Devi (dying declaration) whereupon

        L.T.I. of her husband was by way of suggesting that due to severe

        burn injuries, she might not be in a position to make any statement.

                           16. So far ocular evidence is concerned, it is evident

        that none of them including informant had claimed to be an eye

        witness to occurrence. PW-1, PW-2 have been declared hostile. PW-3

        had stated that after hearing alarm, he rushed to the place of Shankar

        Mahto and seen, there was fire inside house. Door was closed from

        inside. Door was broken whereupon he saw daughter-in-law of

        Shankar Mahto under fire. Some persons extinguished fire, taken to

        doctor. At that very time, she was shouting, but voice was not clear.

        He returned back to his place. This case has been instituted by the

        mother of the deceased. During cross-examination at Para-3, he had

        stated that he does not know how fire was broken.

                           17. PW-4, PW-5 are hearsay witness as they came to

        know about the same after the occurrence. PW-10 is the husband of

        deceased, who had deposed that Aarti Devi was married with him
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                 11




        about 7-8 years ago. Since then, she was residing with him.

        Occurrence is of month of February, 2010. At about 7.00 p.m., he

        received information that his wife burnt while cooking. When he

        reached at his house, he found his wife in burnt condition. She was

        uttering slowly that during course of cooking, she caught fire.

        Thereafter, she was taken to hospital. After admitting her at P.M.C.H.,

        he had gone to Orissa. When he returned back, found all the

        eventualities completed. When he admitted his wife, at that very time,

        police had come, but returned back. This case has been registered by

        his mother-in-law. He further stated that he had put his L.T.I. on blank

        paper. During cross-examination, he had stated that all the family

        members were living jointly. No quarrel had ever taken place. He had

        further deposed that whenever dispute arose with his father, he got it

        calm down. He had further stated that when he reached at his house

        after being informed regarding occurrence, door was opened and she

        was cooking food. He after admitting her, remained there. His mother-

        in-law took his L.T.I. on the pretext of purchasing of medicine. Police

        did not record statement of his wife in his presence. His wife was not

        in a position to speak while she was admitted. His Fua never remained

        with them. In Para-9, he had stated that when he reached at his house,

        his wife had disclosed that during course of cooking, she caught fire.

        Who done 'Shradh', he is unable to say. His father also resides in one
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                 12




        of the rooms of same building.

                           18. PW-9 is informant. She had deposed that her

        daughter Aarti was married 7-8 years ago with Dharmendra, S/o

        Amarnath. When Aarti gone to her sasural, her father-in-law, mother-

        in-law and Mausia mother-in-law began to torture her for dowry. Her

        daughter begotten two children. Occurrence is 5-6 years ago. She got

        information that her daughter is admitted at P.M.C.H. She went there.

        All the members of her sasural were absent. Aarti had disclosed that

        after pouring kerosene oil over her, father-in-law, mother-in-law and

        Mausia mother-in-law lit fire. For the last three days, she was not

        provided food. Aarti died at P.M.C.H. during course of treatment.

        Police came and took her fard-bayan. Post mortem was conducted,

        she conducted rituals. During cross-examination, she had stated that

        after coming to know about occurrence, first of all, she had gone to

        the place of her daughter where house was closed. She came to know

        that daughter is admitted at P.M.C.H. She came to P.M.C.H. and

        found her daughter completely burnt. None of accused was present. In

        Para-9, she had stated that police had recorded statement of his

        daughter in her presence as well as in presence of his son-in-law.

        Same police had recorded her statement. In Para-10, she had deposed

        that accused persons used to treat her daughter badly. At all occasions,

        she used to send her daughter after getting her consoled. No complaint
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                   13




        was made for the same. At Para-11, she had stated that accused

        persons have informed her that as she fell down, therefore, she has

        been admitted at P.M.C.H. Accused persons fled away from hospital.

        When she reached at P.M.C.H., at that very time, her son-in-law was

        present. Her son-in-law lives jointly with his father. She denied the

        suggestion on that very score.

                           19. So from the evidences, it is abundantly clear that

        the statement having been made by the deceased in presence of

        husband (PW-10) has duly found substantiated. Though PW-10

        wanted to explain that his L.T.I. was taken by his mother-in-law,

        which is found completely ruled out from Para-9 of PW-1.

        Furthermore, the theme of accidental fire has itself been tutored by the

        PW-10. Furthermore, PW-10 also showed presence of accused

        Amarnath in the same building, though being tenant of other room.

        Furthermore, from Para-10 of PW-9, she on her own disclosed that the

        the occurrence took place after 7-8 years of marriage.

                           20. All the Courts within the Indian Territory is bound

        to obey the order of the Hon'ble Apex Court as laid down under
Article 141
of the Constitution of India. Furthermore, non-obedience

        of the order will be subject to contempt under
Article 129
of the

        Constitution of India. In the aforesaid background, first of all, the

        relevant direction of the Hon'ble Apex Court is to be seen. In Rajvir
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                     14




        @ Raju and another vs. State of Haryana reported in (2010)15 SCC

        116, the same has been directed in following way:-

                                          "7. We further direct all trial Courts in India to

                                          ordinarily add
Section 302
to the charge of
section

                                          304B
, so that death sentences can be imposed in

                                          such heinous and barbaric crimes against women.

                                          Copy    of   this   order   be       sent   to   Registrar

                                          Generals/Registrars of all High Courts, which will

                                          circulate it to all trial Courts."

                           21. The aforesaid view has further been subject to

        close scrutiny before the Hon'ble Apex Court in Jasvinder Saini &

        others v. State (Government of NCT of Delhi) reported in (2013) 7

        SCC 256, wherein it has been observed:-

                                          "14. Be that as it may the common thread running

                                          through both the orders is that this Court had in

                                          Rajbir‟s case (supra) directed the addition of a

                                          charge under
Section 302
IPC to every case in

                                          which the accused are charged with
Section 304-B
.

                                          That was not, in our opinion, the true purport of

                                          the order passed by this Court. The direction was

                                          not meant to be followed mechanically and without

                                          due regard to the nature of the evidence available

                                          in the case. All that this Court meant to say was

                                          that in a case where a charge alleging dowry death

                                          is framed, a charge under
Section 302
can also be
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                               15




                                          framed if the evidence otherwise permits. No other

                                          meaning could be deduced from the order of this

                                          Court.


                                          15. It is common ground that a charge under
Section 304B
IPC is not a substitute for a charge of

                                          murder punishable under
Section 302
. As in the

                                          case of murder in every case under
Section 304B
also there is a death involved. The question

                                          whether it is murder punishable under
Section 302
IPC or a dowry death punishable under
Section

                                          304B
IPC depends upon the fact situation and the

                                          evidence in the case. If there is evidence whether

                                          direct or circumstantial to prima facie support a

                                          charge under
Section 302
IPC the trial Court can

                                          and indeed ought to frame a charge of murder

                                          punishable under
Section 302
IPC, which would

                                          then be the main charge and not an alternative

                                          charge as is erroneously assumed in some

                                          quarters. If the main charge of murder is not

                                          proved against the accused at the trial, the Court

                                          can look into the evidence to determine whether the

                                          alternative charge of dowry death punishable

                                          under
Section 304B
is established. The ingredients

                                          constituting the two offences are different, thereby

                                          demanding appreciation of evidence from the
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                               16




                                          perspective relevant to such ingredients. The trial

                                          Court in that view of the matter acted mechanically

                                          for it framed an additional charge under
Section

                                          302
IPC without adverting to the evidence adduced

                                          in the case and simply on the basis of the direction

                                          issued in Rajbir‟s case (supra). The High Court no

                                          doubt made a half hearted attempt to justify the

                                          framing of the charge independent of the directions

                                          in Rajbir‟s case (supra), but it would have been

                                          more appropriate to remit the matter back to the

                                          trial Court for fresh orders rather than lending

                                          support to it in the manner done by the High Court.


                                          16. In the light of what we have said above, the

                                          order passed by the trial Court and so also that

                                          passed by the High Court are clearly untenable

                                          and shall have to be set aside. That would not,

                                          however, prevent the trial Court from re-examining

                                          the question of framing a charge under
Section 302
IPC against the appellant and passing an

                                          appropriate order if upon a prima facie appraisal

                                          of the evidence adduced before it, the trial Court

                                          comes to the conclusion that there is any room for

                                          doing so. The trial Court would in that regard keep

                                          in view the decision of this Court in Hasanbhai

                                          Valibhai Qureshi v. State of Gujarat and Ors.
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                  17




                                          (2004) 5 SCC 347 where this Court has recognized

                                          the principle that in cases where the trial Court

                                          upon a consideration of broad probabilities of the

                                          case based upon total effect of the evidence and

                                          documents produced, is satisfied that any addition

                                          or alteration of the charge is necessary, it is free to

                                          do so.


                                          17. Reference may also be made to the decisions of

                                          this Court in Ishwarchand Amichand Govadia and

                                          Ors. v. State of Maharashtra and Anr. (2006) 10

                                          SCC 322 and the decision of the Calcutta High

                                          Court in Rajendra Singh Sethia v. State and Ors.

                                          1989 Cri.L.J. 255 and that delivered by the

                                          Allahabad High Court in Shiv Nandan and Ors. v.

                                          State of U.P. 2005 Cri. L.J 3047 which too are to

                                          the same effect. In any such fresh exercise which

                                          the trial Court may undertake, it shall remain

                                          uninfluenced by the observations made by the High

                                          Court on merits of the case including those

                                          touching the probative value of the autopsy

                                          surgeon‟s opinion."

                           22. Again the issue came up for consideration in Vijay

        Pal Singh and others vs. State of Uttarakhand reported in (2014) 15

        SCC 163 and the same has been dealt with in following way:-

                                          "18. However, it is generally seen that in cases where
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                      18




                                          a married woman dies within seven years of

                                          marriage,      otherwise      than     under      normal

                                          circumstances, no inquiry is usually conducted to see

                                          whether there is evidence, direct or circumstantial, as

                                          to whether the offence falls under
Section 302
of IPC.

                                          Sometimes,
Section 302
of IPC is put as an alternate

                                          charge. In cases where there is evidence, direct or

                                          circumstantial, to show that the offence falls under
Section 302
of IPC, the trial court should frame the

                                          charge under
Section 302
of IPC even if the police

                                          has not expressed any opinion in that regard in the

                                          report under
Section 173(2)
of the Cr.PC.
Section

                                          304B
of IPC can be put as an alternate charge if the

                                          trial court so feels. In the course of trial, if the court

                                          finds   that   there   is    no   evidence,    direct   or

                                          circumstantial, and proof beyond reasonable doubt is

                                          not available to establish that the same is not

                                          homicide, in such a situation, if the ingredients under
Section 304B
of IPC are available, the trial court

                                          should proceed under the said provision. In Muthu

                                          Kutty and another v. State (2005) 9 SCC 113 by

                                          Inspector of Police, T.N.1, this Court addressed the

                                          issue and held as follows:

                                          "20. A reading of
Section 304-B
IPC and
Section

                                          113-B
, Evidence Act together makes it clear that law

                                          authorises a presumption that the husband or any

                                          other relative of the husband has caused the death of
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                  19




                                          a woman if she happens to die in circumstances not

                                          normal and that there was evidence to show that she

                                          was treated with cruelty or harassed before her death

                                          in connection with any demand for dowry. It,

                                          therefore, follows that the husband or the relative, as

                                          the case may be, need not be the actual or direct

                                          participant in the commission of the offence of death.

                                          For those that are direct participants in the

                                          commission of the offence of death there are already

                                          provisions incorporated in Sections 300, 302 and

                                          304. The provisions contained in
Section 304-B
IPC

                                          and
Section 113-B
of the Evidence Act were

                                          incorporated on the anvil of the Dowry Prohibition

                                          (Amendment) Act, 1984, the main object of which is

                                          to curb the evil of dowry in the society and to make it

                                          severely punitive in nature and not to extricate

                                          husbands or their relatives from the clutches of
Section 302
IPC if they directly cause death. This

                                          conceptual difference was not kept in view by the

                                          courts below. But that cannot bring any relief if the

                                          conviction is altered to Section 304 Part II. No

                                          prejudice is caused to the accused-appellants as they

                                          were originally charged for offence punishable under
Section 302
IPC along with
Section 304-B
IPC."

                                          19. In a recent decision, this Court in Jasvinder

                                          Saini and others v. State (Government of NCT of

                                          Delhi) (2013) 7 SCC 256, observed thus:
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                   20




                                          "15. It is common ground that a charge under
Section 304-B
IPC is not a substitute for a charge of

                                          murder punishable under Section 302. As in the case

                                          of murder in every case under Section 304-B also

                                          there is a death involved. The question whether it is

                                          murder punishable under
Section 302
IPC or a dowry

                                          death punishable under
Section 304-B
IPC depends

                                          upon the fact situation and the evidence in the case. If

                                          there is evidence whether direct or circumstantial to

                                          prima facie support a charge under
Section 302
IPC

                                          the trial court can and indeed ought to frame a

                                          charge of murder punishable under
Section 302
IPC,

                                          which would then be the main charge and not an

                                          alternative charge as is erroneously assumed in some

                                          quarters. If the main charge of murder is not proved

                                          against the accused at the trial, the court can look

                                          into the evidence to determine whether the alternative

                                          charge of dowry death punishable under Section 304-

                                          B is established. The ingredients constituting the two

                                          offences    are    different,   thereby     demanding

                                          appreciation of evidence from the perspective

                                          relevant to such ingredients. The trial court in that

                                          view of the matter acted mechanically for it framed

                                          an additional charge under
Section 302
IPC without

                                          adverting to the evidence adduced in the case and

                                          simply on the basis of the direction issued in Rajbir

                                          case. The High Court no doubt made a halfhearted
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                   21




                                          attempt to justify the framing of the charge

                                          independent of the directions in Rajbir case, but it

                                          would have been more appropriate to remit the

                                          matter back to the trial court for fresh orders rather

                                          than lending support to it in the manner done by the

                                          High Court."

                                          20. Though in the instant case the accused were

                                          charged by the Sessions Court under
Section 302
of

                                          IPC, it is seen that the trial court has not made any

                                          serious attempt to make an inquiry in that regard. If

                                          there is evidence available on homicide in a case of

                                          dowry death, it is the duty of the investigating officer

                                          to investigate the case under
Section 302
of IPC and

                                          the prosecution to proceed in that regard and the

                                          court to approach the case in that perspective.

                                          Merely because the victim is a married woman

                                          suffering an unnatural death within seven years of

                                          marriage and there is evidence that she was

                                          subjected to cruelty or harassment on account of

                                          demand for dowry, the prosecution and the court

                                          cannot close its eyes on the culpable homicide and

                                          refrain from punishing its author, if there is evidence

                                          in that regard, direct or circumstantial.

                                          21. In the instant case, the prosecution has not made

                                          any attempt to explain the ante-mortem injuries

                                          which conclusively point to the cause of death as

                                          asphyxia caused by strangulation. Yet, no serious
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                  22




                                          attempt, it is disturbing to note, was done to connect

                                          the murder to its author(s).

                                          22. No doubt, nothing prevents this Court from

                                          putting the appellants on notice as to why the

                                          punishment should not be appropriately enhanced but

                                          why we reluctantly decline to do so, we shall explain

                                          in the later part of the judgment.

                                          23. In two of the early decisions of this Court, after

                                          the introduction of
Section 304B
of IPC, the

                                          ingredients of the offence and the interplay of
Section

                                          304B
of IPC with
Sections 498A
,
302
,
306
of IPC

                                          have also been discussed. In State of Punjab v. Iqbal

                                          Singh and others (1991) 3 SCC 1, the Court in

                                          paragraph-8 stated that:

                                          "8. ... The legislative intent is clear to curb the

                                          menace of dowry deaths, etc., with a firm hand. We

                                          must keep in mind this legislative intent. It must be

                                          remembered     that   since    crimes   are   generally

                                          committed in the privacy of residential homes and in

                                          secrecy, independent and direct evidence is not easy

                                          to get. That is why the legislature has by introducing

                                          Sections 113-A and 113-B in the
Evidence Act
tried

                                          to strengthen the prosecution hands by permitting a

                                          presumption to be raised if certain foundational facts

                                          are established and the unfortunate event has taken

                                          place within seven years of marriage. This period of

                                          seven years is considered to be the turbulent one
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                 23




                                          after which the legislature assumes that the couple

                                          would have settled down in life. If a married women

                                          is subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband

                                          or his family members
Section 498-A
, IPC would be

                                          attracted. If such cruelty or harassment was inflicted

                                          by the husband or his relative for, or in connection

                                          with, any demand for dowry immediately preceding

                                          death by burns and bodily injury or in abnormal

                                          circumstances within seven years of marriage, such

                                          husband or relative is deemed to have caused her

                                          death and is liable to be punished under Section 304-

                                          B,
IPC
. When the question at issue is whether a

                                          person is guilty of dowry death of a woman and the

                                          evidence discloses that immediately before her death

                                          she was subjected by such person to cruelty and/or

                                          harassment for, or in connection with, any demand

                                          for dowry,
Section 113-B
, Evidence Act provides that

                                          the court shall presume that such person had caused

                                          the dowry death. Of course if there is proof of the

                                          person having intentionally caused her death that

                                          would attract
Section 302
, IPC. Then we have a

                                          situation where the husband or his relative by his

                                          willful conduct creates a situation which he knows

                                          will drive the woman to commit suicide and she

                                          actually does so, the case would squarely fall within

                                          the ambit of
Section 306
, IPC. In such a case the

                                          conduct of the person would tantamount to inciting or
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                               24




                                          provoking or virtually pushing the woman into a

                                          desperate situation of no return which would compel

                                          her to put an end to her miseries by committing

                                          suicide. ..."

                           23.
Section 221
of the Cr.P.C. permits the Court to

        convict a person even in case of absence of charge in case of presence

        of sufficient material available on the record and such finding would

        not be subject to challenge as laid down under
Section 464
of the

        Cr.P.C. For better appreciation, the same is quoted below:-

                                         "221. Where it is doubtful what offence has been

                                         committed.

                                         (1) If a single act or series of acts is of such a

                                         nature that it is doubtful which of several offences

                                         the facts which can be proved will constitute, the

                                         accused may be charged with having committed all

                                         or any of such offences, and any number of such

                                         charges may be tried at once; or he may be charged

                                         in the alternative with having committed some one

                                         of the said offences.

                                         (2) If in such a case the accused is charged with one

                                         offence, and it appears in evidence that he

                                         committed a different offence for which he might

                                         have been charged under the provisions of sub-

                                         section (1), he may be convicted of the offence

                                         which he is shown to have committed, although he
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                  25




                                         was not charged with it. Illustrations

                                         (a) A is accused of an act which may amount to

                                         theft, or receiving stolen property, or criminal

                                         breach of trust or cheating. He may be charged

                                         with theft, receiving stolen property, criminal

                                         breach of trust and cheating, or he may be charged

                                         with having committed theft, or receiving stolen

                                         property, or criminal breach of trust or cheating.

                                         (b) In the case mentioned, A is only charged with

                                         theft. It appears that he committed the offence of

                                         criminal breach of trust, or that of receiving stolen

                                         goods. He may be convicted of criminal breach of

                                         trust or of receiving stolen goods (as the case may

                                         be), though he was not charged with such offence.

                                         (c) A states on oath before the Magistrate that he

                                         saw B hit C with a club. Before the Sessions Court

                                         A states on oath that B never hit C. A may be

                                         charged in the alternative and convicted of

                                         intentionally giving false evidence, although it

                                         cannot be proved which of these contradictory

                                         statements was false.

                                         464. Effect of omission to frame, or absence of, or

                                         error in, charge.

                                         (1) No finding, sentence or order by a Court of

                                         competent jurisdiction shall be deemed invalid

                                         merely on the ground that no charge was framed or
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                  26




                                         on the ground of any error, omission or irregularity

                                         in the charge including any misjoinder of charges,

                                         unless, in the opinion of the Court of appeal,

                                         confirmation or revision, a failure of justice has in

                                         fact been occasioned thereby.

                                         (2) If the Court of appeal, confirmation or revision

                                         is of opinion that a failure of justice has in fact been

                                         occasioned, it may-

                                         (a) in the case of an omission to frame a charge,

                                         order that a charge be framed and that the trial be

                                         recommended from the point immediately after the

                                         framing of the charge;

                                         (b) in the case of an error, omission or irregularity

                                         in the charge, direct a new trial to be had upon a

                                         charge framed in whatever manner it thinks fit:

                                         Provided that if the Court is of opinion that the

                                         facts of the case are such that no valid charge could

                                         be preferred against the accused in respect of the

                                         facts proved, it shall quash the conviction."

                         24. In Mohan Singh vs. State of Bihar reported in

        (2011) 9 SCC 272, where no charge under
Section 302
I.P.C. was

        framed, was taken into consideration and has been decided as:-

                                         "27. In view of such consistent opinion of this

                                         Court, we are of the view that no prejudice has been

                                         caused to the appellant for non-mentioning of
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                27
Section 302
I.P.C. in the charge since all the

                                         ingredients of the offence were disclosed. The

                                         appellant had full notice and had ample opportunity

                                         to defend himself against the same and at no earlier

                                         stage of the proceedings, the appellant had raised

                                         any grievance. Apart from that, on overall

                                         consideration of the facts and circumstances of this

                                         case we do not find that the appellant suffered any

                                         prejudice nor has there been any failure of justice.


                                         28. In the instant case, in the charge it has been

                                         clearly mentioned that the accused-appellant has

                                         committed the murder of Anil Jha. By mentioning

                                         that the accused has committed the murder of Anil

                                         Jha all the ingredients of the charge have been

                                         mentioned and the requirement of Section 211, sub-

                                         section (2) has been complied with. Therefore, we

                                         do not find any substance in the aforesaid grievance

                                         of the appellant."

                         25. The Constitution Bench of the Apex Court in Willie

        (William) Slaney vs. State of Madhya Pradesh reported in A.I.R.

        1956 SC 116, has held:-

                                         "44. Now, as we have said, sections 225, 232, 535

                                         and 537(a) between them, cover every conceivable

                                         typo, of error and irregularity referable to a charge
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                   28




                                         that   can possibly arise, ranging from cases in

                                         which there is a conviction with no charge at all

                                         from start to finish down to cases in which there is a

                                         charge but with errors, irregularities and omissions

                                         in it. The Code is emphatic that whatever the

                                         irregularity it is not to be regarded as fatal unless

                                         there is prejudice.


                                         It is the substance that we must seek. Courts have to

                                         administer    justice   and    justice   includes     the

                                         punishment of guilt just as much as the protection of

                                         innocence. Neither can be done if the shadow is

                                         mistaken for the substance and the goal is lost in a

                                         labyrinth of unsubstantial technicalities. Broad

                                         vision is required, a nice balancing of the rights of

                                         the State and the protection of society in general

                                         against   protection    from    harassment       to   the

                                         individual and the risks of unjust conviction.


                                         Every reasonable presumption must be made

                                         infavour of an accused person; he must be given the

                                         benefit of every reasonable doubt. The same broad

                                         principles of justice and fair play must be brought

                                         to bear when determining a matter of prejudice as

                                         in adjudging guilt. But when all is said and done,

                                         what we are concerned to see is whether the

                                         accused bad a fair trial, whether he knew what be
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                               29




                                         was being tried for, whether the main facts sought

                                         to be established against him were explained to him

                                         fairly and clearly and whether he was given a full

                                         and fair chance to defend himself.


                                         If all these elements are there and no prejudice is

                                         shown the conviction must stand whatever the

                                         irregularities whether traceable to the charge or to

                                         a want of one."

                         26. In Darbara Singh vs. State of Punjab reported in

        (2012) 10 SCC 476, it has been held:-

                                         "20. The defect in framing of the charges must be

                                         so serious that it cannot be covered under
Sections

                                         464
/
465
Cr.P.C., which provide that, an order of

                                         sentence or conviction shall not be deemed to be

                                         invalid only on the ground that no charge was

                                         framed, or that there was some irregularity or

                                         omission or misjoinder of charges, unless the court

                                         comes to the conclusion that there was also, as a

                                         consequence, a failure of justice. In determining

                                         whether any error, omission or irregularity in

                                         framing the relevant charges, has led to a failure of

                                         justice, the court must have regard to whether an

                                         objection could have been raised at an earlier

                                         stage, during the proceedings or not. While judging

                                         the question of prejudice or guilt, the court must
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                 30




                                         bear in mind that every accused has a right to a fair

                                         trial, where he is aware of what he is being tried for

                                         and where the facts sought to be established against

                                         him, are explained to him fairly and clearly, and

                                         further, where he is given a full and fair chance to

                                         defend himself against the said charge(s).


                                         21. The „failure of justice‟ is an extremely pliable or

                                         facile expression, which can be made to fit into any

                                         situation in any case. The court must endeavour to

                                         find the truth. There would be „failure of justice‟;

                                         not only by unjust conviction, but also by acquittal

                                         of the guilty, as a result of unjust failure to produce

                                         requisite evidence. Of course, the rights of the

                                         accused have to be kept in mind and also

                                         safeguarded,    but   they   should    not   be   over

                                         emphasised to the extent of forgetting that the

                                         victims also have rights. It has to be shown that the

                                         accused has suffered some disability or detriment in

                                         respect of the protections available to him under

                                         Indian Criminal Jurisprudence. „Prejudice‟, is

                                         incapable of being interpreted in its generic sense

                                         and applied to criminal jurisprudence. The plea of

                                         prejudice has to be in relation to investigation or

                                         trial, and not with respect to matters falling outside

                                         their scope. Once the accused is able to show that
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                               31




                                         there has been serious prejudice caused to him,

                                         with respect to either of these aspects, and that the

                                         same has defeated the rights available to him under

                                         jurisprudence, then the accused can seek benefit

                                         under the orders of the Court. (Vide: Rafiq Ahmed

                                         @ Rafi v. State of U.P., AIR 2011 SC 3114;

                                         Rattiram & Ors. v. State of M.P. through Inspector

                                         of Police, AIR 2012 SC 1485; and Criminal Appeal

                                         No.46 of 2005 (Bhimanna v. State of Karnataka)

                                         decided on 4th September, 2012)."

                         27. In Begu and others vs. King Emperor reported in

        A.I.R. 1925 Privy Council 130, wherein accused was charged and

        convicted at an initial stage under
Section 302
I.P.C., but in appeal,

        conviction was altered under
Section 201
I.P.C. though no charge was

        existing thereunder, it has been held:-

                                                 "A man may be convicted of an offence,

                                 although there has been no charge in respect of it, if the

                                 evidence is such as to establish a charge that might have

                                 been made."

                         28. In Kamalanantha and others vs. State of Tamil

        Nadu reported in (2005) 5 SCC 194, it has been observed:-

                                         "50. It is clear from the aforesaid decisions that

                                         misjoinder of charges is not an illegality but an

                                         irregularity curable under Section 464 or Section
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                32




                                         465
Cr.P.C
. provided no failure of justice had

                                         occasioned thereby. Whether or not the failure of

                                         justice had occasioned thereby, it is the duty of the

                                         Court to see, whether an accused had a fair trial,

                                         whether he knew what he was being tried for,

                                         whether the main facts sought to be established

                                         against him were explained to him fairly and

                                         clearly and whether he was given a full and fair

                                         chance to defend himself."

                         29. In Annareddy Sambasiva Reddy and others vs. State

        of Andhra Pradesh reported in (2009) 12 SCC 546, it has been held:-

                                         "55. In unmistakable terms, Section 464 specifies

                                         that a finding or sentence of a court shall not be set

                                         aside merely on the ground that a charge was not

                                         framed or that charge was defective unless it has

                                         occasioned in prejudice. Because of a mere defect

                                         in language or in the narration or in form of the

                                         charge, the conviction would not be rendered bad if

                                         accused has not been adversely affected thereby. If

                                         the ingredients of the section are obvious or

                                         implicit, conviction in regard thereto can be

                                         sustained irrespective of    the fact that the said

                                         section has not been mentioned."

                         30.     In K. Prema S. Rao and another vs. Yadala

        Srinivasa Rao and others reported in (2003) 1 SCC 217, it has been
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                              33




        held:-

                                         "22. Mere omission or defect in framing charge

                                         does not disable the Criminal Court from convicting

                                         the accused for the offence which is found to have

                                         been proved on the evidence on record. The Code of

                                         Criminal procedure has ample provisions to meet a

                                         situation like the one before us. From the Statement

                                         of Charge framed under Section 304B and in the

                                         alternative
Section 498A
, IPC (as quoted above) it

                                         is clear that all facts and ingredients for framing

                                         charge for offence under
Section 306
, IPC existed

                                         in the case. The mere omission on the part of the

                                         trial Judge to mention of
Section 306
, IPC with

                                         498A,
IPC
does not preclude the Court from

                                         convicting the accused for the said offence when

                                         found proved. In the alternate charge framed under
Section 498A
of IPC, it has been clearly mentioned

                                         that the accused subjected the deceased to such

                                         cruelty and harassment as to drive her to commit

                                         suicide. The provisions of
Section 221
of Cr.P.C.

                                         take care of such a situation and safeguard the

                                         powers of the criminal court to convict an accused

                                         for an offence with which he is not charged

                                         although on facts found in evidence, he could have

                                         been charged for such offence. Section 221 of Cr.
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                               34




                                         P.C. needs reproduction:-


                                         "221. Where it is doubtful what offence has been

                                         committed-(l) If a single act or series of acts is of

                                         such a nature that it is doubtful which of several

                                         offences the facts which can be proved will

                                         constitute, the accused may be charged with having

                                         committed all or any of such offences, and any

                                         number of such charges may be tried at once; or he

                                         may be charged. In the alternative with having

                                         committed some one of the said offences.


                                         (2) If in such a case the accused is charged with one

                                         offence, and it appears in evidence that he

                                         committed a different offence for which he might

                                         have been charged under the provisions of sub-

                                         section (12), he may be convicted of the offence

                                         which he is shown to have committed, although he

                                         was not charged with it.


                                         23. The provision of sub-section (2) of Section 221

                                         read with sub-section (1) of the said Section can be

                                         taken aid of in convicting and sentencing the

                                         accused No. 1 of offence of abetment of suicide

                                         under
Section 306
of IPC along with or instead of
Section 498A
of IPC.


                                         24. Section 215 allows criminal court to ignore any
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                35




                                         error in stating either the offence or the particulars

                                         required to be stated in the charge, if the accused

                                         was not, in fact, misled by such error or omission in

                                         framing the charge and it has not occasioned a

                                         failure of justice. See Section 215 of Cr. P.C. which

                                         reads:-


                                         "215. Effect of errors - No error in stating, either

                                         the offence or the particulars required to be stated

                                         in the charge, and no commission to state the

                                         offence or those particulars, shall be regarded any

                                         stage of the case as material, unless the accused

                                         was in fact misled by such error or omission, and it

                                         has occasioned a failure of justice.


                                         25. As provided in
Section 215
of Cr.P.C.

                                         commission to frame charge under
Section 306
IPC

                                         has not resulted in any failure of justice. We find no

                                         necessity to remit the matter to the trial court for

                                         framing charge under
Section 306
IPC and direct a

                                         retrial for that charge. The accused cannot

                                         legitimately complain of any want of opportunity to

                                         defend the charge under
Section 306
, IPC and a

                                         consequent failure of justice. The same facts found

                                         in evidence, which justify conviction of the

                                         appellant under Section 498A for cruel treatment of

                                         his wife, make out a case against him under Section
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                36




                                         306
IPC
of having abetted commission of suicide by

                                         the wife. The appellant was charged for an offence

                                         of higher degree causing "dowry death" under

                                         Section 304B which is punishable with minimum

                                         sentence of seven years rigorous imprisonment and

                                         maximum for life. Presumption under
Section 113A
of the Evidence Act could also be raised against

                                         him on same facts constituting offence of cruelty

                                         under
Section 498A
, IPC. No further opportunity of

                                         defence is required to be granted to the appellant

                                         when he had ample opportunity to meet the charge

                                         under
Section 498A
, IPC."

                         31. In Dinesh Seth vs. State of NCT of Delhi reported in

        (2008) 14 SCC 94, it has been held:-

                                         "11. A reading of the plain language of Section

                                         221(1) and (2) shows that if a single act or series of

                                         acts constitute several offences and the prosecution

                                         is not certain about the particular offence then the

                                         accused can be charged with the allegation of

                                         having committed all, some or any of the offences.

                                         In such a case the accused can be convicted of the

                                         offence with which he may not have been

                                         specifically charged but evidence produced by the

                                         prosecution proves that such an offence has, in fact,

                                         been committed.
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                               37




                                         12. Section 222(1) lays down that when a person is

                                         charged with an offence consisting of several

                                         particulars and combination of only some of the

                                         particulars constituting a minor offence is proved

                                         then he can be convicted of the minor offence with

                                         which he may not have been charged. Section

                                         222(2) lays down that when a person is charged

                                         with an offence but the facts proved constitute a

                                         minor offence then he can be convicted of the minor

                                         offence despite the fact that he may not have been

                                         charged with that offence. Sub-section (3) of

                                         Section 222 lays down that a person charged with

                                         an offence, can be convicted of an attempt to

                                         commit such offence even though a separate charge

                                         may not have been framed on that account.


                                         13. Section 464(1) lays down that any error,

                                         omission or irregularity in the framing of charge

                                         including any misjoinder of charges, will not

                                         invalidate a finding, sentence or order by a court of

                                         competent jurisdiction unless the higher court

                                         comes to a conclusion that failure of justice has

                                         been occasioned. Sub-section (2) of Section 464

                                         specifies the modes which can be adopted by the

                                         Court of appeal, confirmation or revision, if such

                                         court is of the opinion that a failure of the justice
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                38




                                         has been occasioned on account of non framing of

                                         charge or any error, omission or irregularity in the

                                         framing of charge.


                                         14. The question whether omission to frame a

                                         charge or any error or irregularity in the charge, is

                                         by itself, sufficient for quashing the conviction of

                                         the accused was considered in Willie (William)

                                         Slaney vs. State of M.P. [AIR 1956 SC 116]. After

                                         examining the issue in detail, the Constitution

                                         Bench of this Court observed:-

                                                "6. Before we proceed to set out our answer

                                         and examine the provisions of the Code, we will

                                         pause to observe that the Code is a code of

                                         procedure and, like all procedural laws, is designed

                                         to further the ends of justice and not to frustrate

                                         them by the introduction of endless technicalities.

                                         The object of the Code is to ensure that an accused

                                         person gets a full and fair trial along certain well-

                                         established and well-understood lines that accord

                                         with our notions of natural justice.

                                         If he does, if he is tried by a competent court, if he

                                         is told and clearly understands the nature of the

                                         offence for which he is being tried, if the case

                                         against him is fully and fairly explained to him and

                                         he is afforded a full and fair opportunity of
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                 39




                                         defending    himself,   then,   provided    there   is

                                         `substantial' compliance with the outward forms of

                                         the law, mere mistakes in procedure, mere

                                         inconsequential errors and omissions in the trial

                                         are regarded as venal by the Code and the trial is

                                         not vitiated unless the accused can show substantial

                                         prejudice. That, broadly speaking, is the basic

                                         principle on which the Code is based.

                                                7. Now here, as in all procedural laws,

                                         certain things are regarded as vital. Disregard of a

                                         provision of that nature is fatal to the trial and at

                                         once invalidates the conviction. Others are not vital

                                         and whatever the irregularity they can be cured;

                                         and in that event the conviction must stand unless

                                         the Court is satisfied that there was prejudice. Some

                                         of these matters are dealt with by the Code and

                                         wherever that is the case full effect must be given to

                                         its provisions."

                                         15. The Constitution Bench then referred to the

                                         provisions of
Sections 225
,
232
,
535
and
537
of the

                                         Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, which are

                                         analogous to Section 215, 464 and 465 of the Code

                                         and held (AIR 1956 SC 116.:


                                                "44. "Now, as we have said, Sections 225,

                                         232, 535 and 537(a) between them, cover every
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                   40




                                         conceivable type of error and irregularity referable

                                         to a charge that can possibly arise, ranging from

                                         cases in which there is a conviction with no charge

                                         at all from start to finish down to cases in which

                                         there is a charge but with errors, irregularities and

                                         omissions in it. The Code is emphatic that

                                         `whatever' the irregularity it is not to be regarded

                                         as fatal unless there is prejudice.


                                                   It is the substance that we must seek. Courts

                                         have to administer justice and justice includes the

                                         punishment of guilt just as much as the protection of

                                         innocence. Neither can be done if the shadow is

                                         mistaken for the substance and the goal is lost in a

                                         labyrinth of unsubstantial technicalities. Broad

                                         vision is required, a nice balancing of the rights of

                                         the State and the protection of society in general

                                         against     protection   from    harassment      to   the

                                         individual and the risks of unjust conviction.


                                                   Every reasonable presumption must be

                                         made in favour of an accused person; he must be

                                         given the benefit of every reasonable doubt. The

                                         same broad principles of justice and fair play must

                                         be brought to bear when determining a matter of

                                         prejudice as in adjudging guilt. But when all is said

                                         and done what we are concerned to see is whether
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                              41




                                         the accused had a fair trial, whether he knew what

                                         he was being tried for, whether the main facts

                                         sought to be established against him were explained

                                         to him fairly and clearly and whether he was given

                                         a full and fair chance to defend himself.


                                         If all these elements are there and no prejudice is

                                         shown the conviction must stand whatever the

                                         irregularities whether traceable to the charge or to

                                         a want of one."


                                         16. In Gurbachan Singh vs. State of Punjab [AIR

                                         1957 SC 623], a three Judges' Bench considered the

                                         question of prejudice and observed:

                                         "7. In judging a question of prejudice, as of guilt,

                                         courts must act with a broad vision and look to the

                                         substance and not to technicalities, and their main

                                         concern should be to see whether the accused had a

                                         fair trial, whether he knew what he was being tried

                                         for, whether the main facts sought to be established

                                         against him were explained to him fairly and

                                         clearly and whether he was given a full and fair

                                         chance to defend himself."

                                         17. In Lakhjit Singh vs. State of Punjab [1994 Supp.

                                         (1) SCC 173], the accused were charged and

                                         convicted of offence under
Section 302
IPC. The

                                         High Court upheld their conviction. A two Judges'
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                42




                                         Bench of this Court held that charge under
Section

                                         302
IPC is not established but convicted the

                                         appellants under
Section 306
IPC. While rejecting

                                         the argument that in the absence of a specific

                                         charge under
Section 306
IPC, the appellants

                                         cannot be convicted under that section, the Court

                                         observed:-

                                         "9. The learned counsel, however, submits that

                                         since the charge was for the offence punishable

                                         under
Section 302
Indian Penal Code, the accused

                                         were not put to notice to meet a charge also made

                                         against them under
Section 306
IPC and, therefore,

                                         they are prejudiced by not framing a charge under
Section 306
Indian Penal Code and; therefore,

                                         presumption under
Section 113-A
of Indian

                                         Evidence Act cannot be drawn and consequently a

                                         conviction under Section 306 cannot be awarded.

                                         We    are    unable   to   agree.   The   facts   and

                                         circumstances of the case have been put forward

                                         against the accused under
Section 313
CrPC and

                                         when there was a demand for dowry it cannot be

                                         said that the accused are prejudiced because the

                                         cross-examination of the witnesses, as well as the

                                         answers given under
Section 313
CrPC would show

                                         that they had enough of notice of the allegations

                                         which attract
Section 306
Indian Penal Code also."
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                43




                                         18. In Sangaraboina Sreenu vs. State of A.P. [1997

                                         (5) SCC 348], another Bench of two Judges'

                                         expressed a contrary view. The facts of that case

                                         were that the accused was convicted by the trial

                                         court under
Section 302
IPC. The High Court

                                         converted the conviction to one under
Section 306
IPC. While reversing the judgment of the High

                                         Court, this Court held:

                                         "2. This appeal must succeed for the simple reason

                                         that having acquitted the appellant of the charge

                                         under
Section 302
IPC -- which was the only charge

                                         framed against him -- the High Court could not

                                         have convicted him of the offence under
Section 306
IPC. It is true that
Section 222
CrPC entitles a

                                         court to convict a person of an offence which is

                                         minor in comparison to the one for which he is tried

                                         but
Section 306
IPC cannot be said to be a minor

                                         offence in relation to an offence under
Section 302
IPC within the meaning of
Section 222
CrPC for the

                                         two offences are of distinct and different categories.

                                         While the basic constituent of an offence under
Section 302
IPC is homicidal death, those of
Section 306
IPC are suicidal death and abetment

                                         thereof."

                                         19. In view of the apparently conflicting judgments
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                               44




                                         of the coordinate Benches, the issue was referred to

                                         a larger Bench. In Dalbir Singh vs. State of U.P.

                                         [2004 (5) SCC 334], a three Judges' Bench

                                         considered the provisions of Section 222 and 464 of

                                         the Code and observed:-

                                         "14.....Sub-section (1) of Section 222 lays down that

                                         when a person is charged with an offence consisting

                                         of several particulars, a combination of some only

                                         of which constitutes a complete minor offence, and

                                         such combination is proved, but the remaining

                                         particulars are not proved, he may be convicted of

                                         the minor offence, though he was not charged with

                                         it. Sub- section (2) of the same section lays down

                                         that when a person is charged with an offence and

                                         facts are proved which reduce it to a minor offence,

                                         he may be convicted of the minor offence, although

                                         he is not charged with it.
Section 222
CrPC is in the

                                         nature of a general provision which empowers the

                                         court to convict for a minor offence even though

                                         charge has been framed for a major offence.

                                         Illustrations (a) and (b) to the said section also

                                         make the position clear. However, there is a

                                         separate chapter in the
Code of Criminal

                                         Procedure
, namely, Chapter XXXV which deals

                                         with irregular proceedings and their effect. This

                                         chapter enumerates various kinds of irregularities
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                45




                                         which have the effect of either vitiating or not

                                         vitiating the proceedings. Section 464 of the Code

                                         deals with the effect of omission to frame, or

                                         absence of, or error in, charge. Sub-section (1) of

                                         this section provides that no finding, sentence or

                                         order by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be

                                         deemed invalid merely on the ground that no

                                         charge was framed or on the ground of any error,

                                         omission or irregularity in the charge including any

                                         misjoinder of charges, unless, in the opinion of the

                                         court of appeal, confirmation or revision, a failure

                                         of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby. This

                                         clearly shows that any error, omission or

                                         irregularity in the charge including any misjoinder

                                         of charges shall not result in invalidating the

                                         conviction or order of a competent court unless the

                                         appellate or revisional court comes to the

                                         conclusion that a failure of justice has in fact been

                                         occasioned thereby."     (emphasis in original)

                                         20. The three Judges' Bench then referred to the

                                         earlier judgments in Willie (William) Slaney vs.

                                         State of M.P. (A.I.R. 1956 SC 116), Gurbachan

                                         Singh vs. State of Punjab (supra) and observed:-

                                         "17. There is a catena of decisions of this Court on

                                         the same lines and it is not necessary to burden this
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                 46




                                         judgment by making reference to each one of them.

                                         Therefore, in view of
Section 464
CrPC, it is

                                         possible for the appellate or revisional court to

                                         convict an accused for an offence for which no

                                         charge was framed unless the court is of the opinion

                                         that a failure of justice would in fact occasion. In

                                         order to judge whether a failure of justice has been

                                         occasioned, it will be relevant to examine whether

                                         the accused was aware of the basic ingredients of

                                         the offence for which he is being convicted and

                                         whether the main facts sought to be established

                                         against him were explained to him clearly and

                                         whether he got a fair chance to defend himself. We

                                         are, therefore, of the opinion that Sangaraboina

                                         Sreenu was not correctly decided as it purports to

                                         lay down as a principle of law that where the

                                         accused is charged under
Section 302
IPC, he

                                         cannot be convicted for the offence under
Section

                                         306
IPC."

                                         21. The ratio of the above noted judgments is that in

                                         certain situations an accused can be convicted of an

                                         offence with which he may not have been

                                         specifically charged and that an error, omission or

                                         irregularity in the framing of charge is, by itself not

                                         sufficient   for   upsetting   the   conviction.   The

                                         appellate, confirming or revisional Court can
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                              47




                                         interfere in such matters only if it is shown that

                                         error, omission or irregularity in the framing of

                                         charge has caused prejudice to the accused and

                                         failure of justice has been occasioned."

                         32. In Sanichar Sahni vs. State of Bihar reported in

        (2009) 7 SCC 198, it has been held:-

                                         21. It is also not the case where the appellant can

                                         take the plea that he was not aware as what was the

                                         charge against him and what defence he could lead.

                                         There had been evidence of hatching the conspiracy

                                         of impeccable character. On the point of conspiracy

                                         the courts below have recorded the finding against

                                         the appellant.


                                         22. In State of A.P. v. Thakkidiram Reddy, (1998) 6

                                         SCC 554, this Court considered the issue of not

                                         framing the proper charges. In that case averment

                                         had been raised that charges have not been framed

                                         against the accused persons in accordance with
Section 211
Cr.P.C.. In that case the charge had

                                         been framed under
Section 148
IPC, though it was

                                         alleged that they were the members of an unlawful

                                         assembly, it was not mentioned what its common

                                         object was. Besides, it was contended, a charge

                                         under
Section 302
IPC simpliciter was framed

                                         against all the accused persons and not with the aid
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                 48




                                         of
Section 149
IPC for which they were convicted

                                         by the trial court.


                                         23. This Court repealed the contention observing as

                                         under: (1998) 6 SCC 554).

                                         "10. Sub-section (1) of
Section 464
of the Code of

                                         Criminal Procedure 1973 ("Code" for short)

                                         expressly provides that no finding, sentence or

                                         order by; a court of competent jurisdiction shall be

                                         deemed invalid merely on the ground that no

                                         charge was framed or on the ground of any error,

                                         omission or irregularity in the charge including any

                                         misjoinder of charges, unless in the opinion of the

                                         court of appeal, confirmation or revision, a failure

                                         of justice has in fact (emphasis supplied) been

                                         occasioned thereby. Sub-section (2) of the said

                                         section lays down the procedure that the court of

                                         appeal, confirmation or revision has to follow in

                                         case it is of the opinion that a failure of justice has

                                         in fact been occasioned. The other section relevant

                                         for our purposes is Section 465 of the Code; and it

                                         lays down that no finding, sentence or order passed

                                         by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be

                                         reversed or altered by a court of appeal,

                                         confirmation or revision on account of any error,

                                         omission or irregularity in the proceedings, unless
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                49




                                         in the opinion of that court, a failure of justice has

                                         in fact been occasioned. It further provides, inter

                                         alia, that in    determining whether any error,

                                         omission or irregularity in any proceeding under

                                         this Code has occasioned a failure of justice, the

                                         Court shall have regard to the fact whether the

                                         objection could and should have been raised at an

                                         earlier stage in the proceedings."        (emphasis in

                                         original)

                                         24. The Court in Thakkidiram case 1998) 6 SCC

                                         554 further held that in judging a question of

                                         prejudice, as of guilt, court must act with a broad

                                         vision and look to the substance and not to

                                         technicalities, and its main concern should be to see

                                         whether the accused had a fair trial, whether he

                                         knew what he was being tried for, whether the main

                                         facts sought to be established against him were

                                         explained to him fairly and clearly and whether he

                                         was given a full and fair chance to defend himself.

                                         In the said case this Court ultimately came to the

                                         conclusion that in spite of defect in framing of

                                         charge, as no prejudice had been caused to the

                                         convicts, no interference was required.


                                         25. A Constitution Bench of this Court in Willie

                                         (William) Slaney, v. State of M.P., AIR 1956 SC
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                   50




                                         116, considered the issue of non- framing of

                                         charges properly and conviction of an accused for

                                         the offences for which he has not been charged and

                                         reached the conclusion as under:-

                                         "86. ...In such a situation, the absence of a charge

                                         under one or other of the various heads of criminal

                                         liability for the offence cannot be said to be fatal by

                                         itself, and before a conviction for the substantive

                                         offence, without a charge, can be set aside,

                                         prejudice will have to be made out. .... .....

                                         87 .... If it is so grave that prejudice will necessarily

                                         be implied or imported, it may be described as an

                                         illegality. If the seriousness of the omission is of a

                                         lesser degree, it will be an irregularity and

                                         prejudice by way of failure of justice will have to be

                                         established".

                                         26. This Court in Gurpreet Singh v. State of Punjab,

                                         (2005) 12 SCC 615 referred to and relied upon its

                                         earlier judgments in Willie (William) Slaney, (AIR

                                         1956 SC 116) and State of A.P. v. Thakkidiram

                                         Reddy, (1998) 6 SCC 554) and held that unless

                                         there is failure of justice and thereby the cause of

                                         the accused has been prejudiced, no interference is

                                         required if the conviction can be upheld on the

                                         evidence led against the accused. The Court should
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                 51




                                         not interfere unless it is established that the accused

                                         persons were in any way prejudiced due to the

                                         errors and omissions in framing the charges against

                                         him. A similar view has been reiterated by this

                                         Court in Ramji Singh v. State of Bihar (2001) 9

                                         SCC 528.


                                         29. On this very issue of conspiracy, the

                                         prosecution led evidence of impeccable character of

                                         two witnesses, namely, Ashok Paswan PW.2 and

                                         Ashok Kumar Verma PW.5. The appellant was

                                         given full opportunity to defend himself only on this

                                         very point of conspiracy as there was no other

                                         allegation against him. He was asked specific

                                         question by the trial court on the point of

                                         conspiracy while recording his statement under
Section 313
Cr.P.C. Therefore, it cannot be held

                                         even by any       stretch of imagination that any

                                         prejudice has been caused to the appellant on this

                                         very issue."

                         33. At the present moment, one should not lost sight of

        obligation having entrusted on the part of the Court as well as

        prosecutor in case being sessions triable, as
Section 226
Cr.P.C.

        prescribes an obligation upon the prosecutor to open his case by

        stating that under what penal provisions, charge is to be framed and
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                  52




        by what evidence the aforesaid charge is going to be proved which, in

        terms of Section 227 as well as
Section 228
of the Cr.P.C. the Court

        has to perceive whether the materials having placed before the Court

        is to justify trial and if so, under what relevant provision Court

        attracts discharge on account of paucity of prima facie material.

                         34. At the present moment, one more aspect is to be seen

        as is visualizing from the record itself. From the L.C. Record, it is

        evident that fard-bayan of informant does contain disclosure that fard-

        bayan of deceased was already recorded by Pirbahore P.S. at an

        earlier occasion which, the reason best known to the concerned

        authorities did not find favour as that version was the initial version

        which ought to have been the basis of the registration of the case and

        further, the aforesaid statement which later on became dying

        declaration was kept away and remained away conspiracy though duly

        certified photo copy has been brought up on record by PW-6 and PW-

        7, Investigating Officer during course of trial Exhibit-1, which

        completely rules out the theme of dowry death rather as deceased did

        not accede to lecherous desire of the accused/ appellant on account

        thereof, she was caught hold, kerosene oil was sprinkled and then, lit

        fire over her body by the appellants.

                         35. Whether it happens to be a miscarriage of justice or

        not, is a theme to be perceived whereupon de novo trial be directed
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                     53




        while exercising appellate power in terms of
Section 386
of the

        Cr.P.C. Though, such eventualities have not been defined under
Section 386
of the Cr.P.C. At the other end, it has been left out within

        the arena of appellate Court to pass such order in a case so

        appreciated, warranting the same.

                         36. At the present juncture, it looks pertinent to perceive

        the submission made on behalf of learned counsel for the appellant,

        who has stressed over Clause-b(1) of
Section 386
of the Cr.P.C. and

        submitted that first obligation which, the appellate Court is to

        discharge, to acquit the appellant by way of reversing the finding and

        if not, then may order for retrial in appropriate cases. That being so,

        retrial should not be the proper step taken by the appellate Court even

        finding lapses at the part of the lower Court which, on due

        consideration, be considered as a ground for acquittal of the accused

        and not for retrial. Lapses were at the end of learned lower Court and

        so, the same could not be allowed to be corrected, filled up in order to

        sustain conviction against an accused causing prejudice to their

        interest.

                         37. There happens to be obligation on the part of the

        Court to see that it is not only protection of the interest of the accused

        rather it is also for protection of the victim. A crime is not always

        against an individual rather it happens to be against the State and so,
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                 54




        its impact has also to been seen, more particularly allowing a

        perception against the system that on account of wrong having been

        committed by the Court, the culprit has been allowed to go escort free.

        Furthermore, the Court should not be a mere silent expectator rather it

        has to be active during course of trial to ward off any kind of lapses

        affecting the trial on account of undue steps. That being so, an

        obligation having attributed upon a Court by the statute is to be duly

        discharged in legal way so that no one could found aggrieved thereby.

                         38. Miscarriage of justice is not at all defined rather it

        happens to be an eventuality perceived by the Court, committed by

        the Court which ultimately cost upon proprietary of the judgment

        Court. As has been referred by learned counsel for the appellant in

        Ajay Kumar Ghoshal Etc. vs. State of Bihar and another reported in

        2017(1) P.L.J.R. 458 (SC), it has been held by the Hon'ble Apex

        Court as follows:-

                                               "10.
Section 386
Cr.P.C. deals with the powers

                                               of the appellate court. As per
Section 386 (b)
Cr.P.C, in an appeal from a conviction, the

                                               appellate court may:- (i) reverse the finding and

                                               sentence and acquit or discharge the accused, or

                                               order him to be re-tried by a Court of competent

                                               jurisdiction subordinate to such Appellate Court

                                               or committed for trial, or
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                       55




                                               (ii) alter the finding, maintaining the sentence, or

                                               (iii) with or without altering the finding, alter the

                                               nature or the extent, or the nature and extent, of

                                               the sentence, but not so as to enhance the same.


                                               11. Though the word "retrial" is used under
Section 386(b)(i)
Cr.P.C., the powers conferred

                                               by this clause is to be exercised only in

                                               exceptional cases, where the appellate court is

                                               satisfied that the omission or irregularity has

                                               occasioned     in    failure     of     justice.   The

                                               circumstances that should exist for warranting a

                                               retrial must be such that where the trial was

                                               undertaken by the Court having no jurisdiction,

                                               or trial was vitiated by serious illegality or

                                               irregularity on account of the misconception of

                                               nature of proceedings. An order for retrial may

                                               be passed in cases where the original trial has

                                               not been satisfactory for some particular reasons

                                               such as wrong admission or wrong rejection of

                                               evidences or the Court refused to hear certain

                                               witnesses who were supposed to be heard.

                         39.    In    Ukha         Kolhe-appellant         v.    the      State    of

        Maharashtra-respondent reported in A.I.R. 1963 (SC) 1531, the

        majority view of the Constitution Bench held as follows:-
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                    56




                                               "11. An order for retrial of a criminal case is

                                               made in exceptional cases, and not unless the

                                               appellate Court is satisfied that the Court trying

                                               the proceeding had no jurisdiction to try it or

                                               that the trial was vitiated by serious illegalities

                                               or irregularities or on account of misconception

                                               of the nature of the proceedings and on that

                                               account in substance there had been no real trial

                                               or that the Prosecutor or an accused was, for

                                               reasons over which he had no control, prevented

                                               from leading or tendering evidence material to

                                               the charge, and in the interests of justice the

                                               appellate Court deems it appropriate, having

                                               regard to the circumstances of the case, that the

                                               accused should be put on his trial again. An

                                               order of re-trial wipes out from the record the

                                               earlier proceeding, and exposes the person

                                               accused to another trial which affords the

                                               prosecutor    an   opportunity    to   rectify   the

                                               infirmities disclosed in the earlier trial, and will

                                               not ordinarily be countenanced when it is made

                                               merely to enable the prosecutor to lead evidence

                                               which he could but has not cared to lead either

                                               on account of insufficient appreciation of the

                                               nature of the case or for other reasons. Harries,

                                               C. J.,in Ramanlal Rathi v. The State AIR 1951
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                      57




                                               Cal 305 observed :

                                               "If at the end of a criminal prosecution the

                                               evidence leaves the Court in doubt as to the guilt

                                               of the accused the latter is entitled to a. verdict of

                                               not guilty. A retrial may be ordered when the

                                               original trial has not been satisfactory for

                                               particular reasons, for example, if evidence had

                                               been wrongly rejected which should have been

                                               admitted, or admitted when it should have been

                                               rejected, or the Court had refused to hear certain

                                               witness who should have been heard. But retrial

                                               cannot be ordered on the ground that, the

                                               prosecution did not produce the proper evidence

                                               and did not know how to prove their case."

                                               In the present case, undoubtedly the trial before

                                               the Magistrate suffered from irregularities which

                                               we have already set out. The evidence, such as

                                               was led, was deficient in important respects; but

                                               that could not be a sufficient ground for directing

                                               a retrial. If the Sessions judge thought that in the

                                               interests of justice and for a just and proper

                                               decision of the case it was necessary that

                                               additional evidence should be brought on the

                                               record he should have, instead of directing a

                                               retrial and reopening the entire proceedings
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                  58




                                               resorted to the procedure prescribed by s. 428 (i)

                                               or the
Code of Criminal Procedure
. There is no

                                               doubt that if the ends of justice require, the

                                               appellate Court should exercise its power under

                                               the said section.

                         40. In Rajeshwar Prasad Mishra, Appellant v. the State

        of West Bengal and another, Respondents reported in A.I.R. 1965

        SC 1887, wherein it has been held:-

                                          "8. These arguments disclose a tendency to read

                                          the observations of this Court as statutory

                                          enactments. No doubt, the law declared by this

                                          Court binds Courts in India but it should always be

                                          remembered that this Court does not enact. The

                                          two cases of this Court point out that in criminal

                                          jurisdiction the guiding principle is that a person

                                          must not be vexed twice for the same offence. That

                                          principle is embodied in S. 403 of the Code and is

                                          now included as a Fundamental Right in
Art. 20(2)
of the Constitution. The protection, however, is

                                          only as long as the conviction or acquittal stands.

                                          But the Code contemplates that a retrial may be

                                          ordered after setting aside the conviction or

                                          acquittal (as the case may be) if the trial already

                                          held is found to be unsatisfactory or leads to a

                                          failure of justice. In the same way, the Code gives a
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                       59




                                          power to the appellate Court to take additional

                                          evidence, which, for reasons to be recorded, it

                                          considers necessary. The Code thus gives power to

                                          the appellate Court to order one or the other as the

                                          circumstances     may       require    leaving     a    wide

                                          discretion to it to deal appropriately with different

                                          cases. The two cases of this Court deal with

                                          situations in which a retrial was considered

                                          necessary by the appellate Court. In the case of

                                          Abinash Chandra Bose, AIR 1963 SC 316, this

                                          Court held that the order for retrial was not

                                          justified. In Ukha Kolhe's case, AIR 1963 SC 1531,

                                          too     the   order   for    retrial    was      considered

                                          unnecessary because the end could have been

                                          achieved equally        well    by     taking additional

                                          evidence. This Court mentioned, by way of

                                          illustration, some of the circumstances which

                                          frequently occur and in which retrial may properly

                                          be ordered. It is not to be imagined that the list

                                          there given was exhaustive or that this Court was

                                          making a clean cut between those cases where

                                          retrial rather than the taking of additional evidence

                                          was the proper course. It is easy to contemplate

                                          other     circumstances      where     retrial    may    be

                                          necessary as for example where a conviction or an

                                          acquittal was obtained by fraud, or a trial for a
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                               60




                                          wrong offence was held or abettors were tried as

                                          principal offenders and vice versa. Many other

                                          instances can be imagined. The Legislature has not

                                          chosen to indicate the limits of the power and this

                                          Court must not be understood to have laid them

                                          down. Cases may arise where either of the two

                                          courses may appear equally appropriate. Since a

                                          wide discretion is conferred on appellate Courts,

                                          the limits of that Court's jurisdiction must+

                                          obviously be dictated by the exigency of the

                                          situation and fair play and good sense appear to be

                                          the only safe guides. There is, no doubt some

                                          analogy between the power to order a retrial ind

                                          the power to take additional evidence. The former

                                          is an extreme step approximately taken if

                                          additional evidence will not suffice. Both actions

                                          subsume failure of justice as a condition precedent.

                                          There the resemblance ends and it is hardly proper

                                          to construe one section with the aid of observations

                                          made by this Court in the interpretation of the

                                          other section."

                         41. In ShamSaheb M. Multtani vs. State of Karnataka

        reported in (2001) 2 SCC 577, it has been held:-

                                         "24. One of the cardinal principles of natural

                                         justice is that no man should be condemned without
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                61




                                         being heard, (Audi alterum partem). But the law

                                         reports are replete with instances of courts

                                         hesitating to approve the contention that failure of

                                         justice had occasioned merely because a person

                                         was not heard on a particular aspect. However, if

                                         the aspect is of such a nature that non-explanation

                                         of it has contributed to penalising an individual, the

                                         court should say that since he was not given the

                                         opportunity to explain that aspect there was failure

                                         of justice on account of non-compliance with the

                                         principle of natural justice.


                                         32. The serious consequence which may ensue to

                                         the accused in such a situation can be limned

                                         through an illustration:- If a bride was murdered

                                         within seven years of her marriage and there was

                                         evidence to show that either on the previous day or

                                         a couple of days earlier she was subjected to

                                         harassment by her husband with demand for dowry,

                                         such husband would be guilty of the offence on the

                                         language of
Section 304-B
IPC read with
Section

                                         113-B
of the Evidence Act. But if the murder of his

                                         wife was actually committed either by a decoit or by

                                         a militant in a terrorist act the husband can lead

                                         evidence to show that he had no hand in her death

                                         at all. If he succeeds in discharging the burden of
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                62




                                         proof he is not liable to be convicted under
Section

                                         304B
, IPC. But if the husband is charged only

                                         under
Section 302
IPC he has no burden to prove

                                         that his wife was murdered like that as he can have

                                         his traditional defence that the prosecution has

                                         failed to prove the charge of murder against him

                                         and claim an order of acquittal.


                                         33. The above illustration would amplify the gravity

                                         of the consequence befalling an accused if he was

                                         only asked to defend a charge under
Section 302
IPC and was alternatively convicted under
Section

                                         304B
IPC without any notice to him, because he is

                                         deprived of the opportunity to disprove the burden

                                         cast on him by law.


                                         34. In such a situation, if the trial court finds that

                                         the prosecution has failed to make out the case

                                         under
Section 302
IPC, but the offence under
Section 304-B
IPC has been made out, the court has

                                         to call upon the accused to enter on his defence in

                                         respect of the said offence. Without affording such

                                         an opportunity to the accused, a conviction under
Section 304-B
IPC would lead to real and serious

                                         miscarriage of justice. Even if no such count was

                                         included in the charge, when the court affords him

                                         an opportunity to discharge his burden by putting
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                 63




                                         him to notice regarding the prima facie view of the

                                         court that he is liable to be convicted under
Section

                                         304B
IPC, unless he succeeds in disproving the

                                         presumption, it is possible for the court to enter

                                         upon a conviction of the said offence in the event of

                                         his failure to disprove the presumption.


                                         35. As the appellant was convicted by the High

                                         Court under
Section 304-B
IPC, without such

                                         opportunity being granted to him, we deem it

                                         necessary in the interest of justice to afford him that

                                         opportunity. The case in the trial court should

                                         proceed against the appellant (not against the other

                                         two accused whose acquittal remains unchallenged

                                         now) from the stage of defence evidence. He is put

                                         to notice that unless he disproves the presumption,

                                         he is liable to be convicted under
section 304-B
IPC."

                         42. In Vinod Kumar vs. State of Punjab reported in

        (2015) 3 SCC 220, it has been held:-

                                         "3. The narration of the sad chronology shocks the

                                         judicial conscience and gravitates the mind to pose

                                         a question, is it justified for any conscientious trial

                                         Judge to ignore the statutory command, not

                                         recognize "the felt necessities of time" and remain

                                         impervious to the cry of the collective asking for
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                64




                                         justice or give an indecent and uncalled for burial

                                         to the conception of trial, totally ostracizing the

                                         concept that a civilized and orderly society thrives

                                         on rule of law which includes "fair trial" for the

                                         accused as well as the prosecution.;

                         43. In Rattiram and others vs. State of Madhya Pradesh

        with Satyanarayan and others vs. State of Madhya Pradesh reported

        in (2012) 4 SCC 516, it has been held:-

                                         "39. The question posed by us fundamentally

                                         relates to the non-compliance of such interdict. The

                                         crux of the matter is whether it is such a substantial

                                         interdict which impinges upon the fate of the trial

                                         beyond any redemption or, for that matter it is such

                                         an omission or it is such an act that defeats the

                                         basic conception of fair trial. Fundamentally, a fair

                                         and impartial trial has a sacrosanct purpose. It has

                                         a demonstrable object that the accused should not

                                         be prejudiced. A fair trial is required to be

                                         conducted in such a manner which would totally

                                         ostracise injustice, prejudice, dishonesty and

                                         favouritism."

                         44. In Pooja Pal vs. Union of India and others reported

        in (2016) 3 SCC 135, it has been held:-

                                         "53. This Court in the above disquieting backdrop
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                 65




                                         in Zahira Habibulla Sheikh case (2004) 4 SCC 158,

                                         did underline that discovery, vindication and

                                         establishment of truth were the avowed purposes

                                         underlying the existence of the courts of justice.

                                         Apart from indicating that the principles of a fair

                                         trial permeate the common law in both civil and

                                         criminal contexts, this Court underscored the

                                         necessity of a delicate judicial balancing of the

                                         competing interests in a criminal trial - the interests

                                         of the accused and the public and to a great extent

                                         that too of the victim, at the same time not losing

                                         the sight of public interest involved in the

                                         prosecution of persons who commit offences.


                                         54. It was propounded in Zahira Habibulla Sheikh

                                         case (2004) 4 SCC 158 that in a criminal case, the

                                         fate of the proceedings cannot always be left

                                         entirely in the hands of the parties, crimes being

                                         public wrongs in breach and violation of public

                                         rights and duties, which affect the whole community

                                         and are harmful to the society in general. That the

                                         concept of fair trial entails the triangulation of the

                                         interest of the accused, the victim, society and that

                                         the community acts through the state and the

                                         prosecuting agency was authoritatively stated. This

                                         Court observed that the interests of the society are
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                              66




                                         not to be treated completely with disdain and as

                                         persona non grata. It was remarked as well that due

                                         administration of justice is always viewed as a

                                         continuous    process,   not    confined    to   the

                                         determination of a particular case so much so that a

                                         court must cease to be a mute spectator and a mere

                                         recording machine but become a participant in the

                                         trial evincing intelligence and active interest and

                                         elicit all relevant materials necessary for reaching

                                         the correct conclusion, to find out the truth and

                                         administer justice with fairness and impartiality

                                         both to the parties and to the community.


                                         55. In Zahira Habibulla Sheikh case (2004) 4 SCC

                                         158, While highlighting the courts‟ overriding duty

                                         to maintain public confidence in the administration

                                         of justice, it was enunciated as well, that they

                                         cannot turn a blind eye to vexatious and oppressive

                                         conduct, discernable in relation to the proceedings.

                                         That the principles of rule of law and due process

                                         are closely linked with human rights protection,

                                         guaranteeing a fair trial, primarily aimed at

                                         ascertaining the truth, was stated. It was held as

                                         well, that the society at large and the victims or

                                         their family members and relatives have an inbuilt

                                         right to be dealt fairly in a criminal trial and the
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                 67




                                         denial thereof is as much injustice to the accused as

                                         to the victim and the society.


                                         56. Dwelling upon the uncompromising significance

                                         and the worth of witnesses in the perspective of a

                                         fair trial, the following revealing comments of

                                         Bentham were extracted in paragraph 41:


                                         "41. "Witnesses", as Bentham said: are the eyes

                                         and ears of justice. Hence, the importance and

                                         primacy of the quality of trial process. If the witness

                                         himself is incapacitated from acting as eyes and

                                         ears of justice, the trial gets putrefied and

                                         paralysed, and it no longer can constitute a fair

                                         trial. The incapacitation may be due to several

                                         factors like the witness being not in a position for

                                         reasons beyond control to speak the truth in the

                                         court or due to negligence or ignorance or some

                                         corrupt collusion. Time has become ripe to act on

                                         account of numerous experiences faced by courts on

                                         account of frequent turning of witnesses as hostile,

                                         either due to threats, coercion, lures and monetary

                                         considerations at the instance of those in power,

                                         their henchmen and hirelings, political count and

                                         patronage and innumerable other corrupt practices

                                         ingeniously adopted to smother and stifle truth and

                                         realities coming out to surface rendering truth and
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                68




                                         justice to become ultimate causalities. Broader

                                         public and societal interests require that the victims

                                         of the crime who are not ordinarily parties to

                                         prosecution and the interests of State represented

                                         by their prosecuting agencies do not suffer even in

                                         slot process but irreversibly and irretrievably,

                                         which if allowed would undermine and destroy

                                         public confidence in the administration of justice,

                                         which may ultimately pave way for anarchy,

                                         oppression and injustice resulting in complete

                                         breakdown and collapse of the edifice of rule of

                                         law, enshrined and jealously guarded and protected

                                         by the Constitution. There comes the need for

                                         protecting the witness. Time has come when serious

                                         and undiluted thoughts are to be bestowed for

                                         protecting witnesses so that ultimate truth is

                                         presented before the court and justice triumphs and

                                         that the trial is not reduced to a mockery. The State

                                         has a definite role to play in protecting the

                                         witnesses, to start with at least in sensitive cases

                                         involving those in power, who have political

                                         patronage and could wield muscle and money

                                         power, to avert the trial getting tainted and derailed

                                         and truth becoming a causality. As a protector of its

                                         citizens it has to ensure that during a trial in court

                                         the witness could safely depose the truth without
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                 69




                                         any fear of being haunted by those against whom he

                                         has deposed."


                                         57. It was underlined in Zahira Habibulla Sheikh

                                         case (2004) 4 SCC 158 that if ultimately the truth is

                                         to be arrived at, the eyes and ears of justice have to

                                         be protected so that the interest of justice do not get

                                         incapacitated    in   the   sense   of   making    the

                                         proceedings before the courts, mere mock trials.

                                         While elucidating that a court ought to exercise its

                                         powers under Section 311 of the Code and
Section

                                         165
of the Evidence Act judicially and with

                                         circumspection, it was held that such invocation

                                         ought to be only to subserve the cause of justice and

                                         the public interest by eliciting evidence in aid of a

                                         just decision and to uphold the truth. It was

                                         proclaimed that though justice is depicted to be

                                         blindfolded, it is only a veil not to see who the party

                                         before it is, while pronouncing judgment on the

                                         cause brought before it by enforcing the law and

                                         administer justice and not to ignore or turn the

                                         attention away from the truth of the cause or the lis

                                         before it, in disregard of its duty to prevent

                                         miscarriage of justice. That any indifference,

                                         inaction or lethargy displayed in protecting the

                                         right of an ordinary citizen, more particularly when
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                70




                                         a grievance is expressed against the mighty

                                         administration, would erode the public faith in the

                                         judicial system was underlined. It was highlighted

                                         that the courts exist to do justice to the persons who

                                         are affected and therefore they cannot afford to get

                                         swayed by the abstract technicalities and close their

                                         eyes to the factors which need to be positively

                                         probed and noticed. The following statement in

                                         Jennison vs. Baker, (1972) 1 All ER 997 was

                                         recalled:


                                         "The law should not be seen to sit by limply, while

                                         those who defy it go free, and those who seek its

                                         protection lose hope."


                                         58. It was declared in Zahira Habibulla Sheikh case

                                         (2004) 4 SCC 158 that the courts have to ensure

                                         that the accused persons are punished and that the

                                         might or the authority of the state is not used to

                                         shield themselves and their men and it should be

                                         ensured that they do not wield such powers, which

                                         under the Constitution has to be held only in trust

                                         for the public and society at large. That if any

                                         deficiency in investigation or prosecution is visible

                                         or can be perceived by lifting the veil covering such

                                         deficiency, the courts have to deal with the same

                                         with an iron hand appropriately within the
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                 71




                                         framework of law was underlined.


                                         59. Referring to its earlier decision in Karnel Singh

                                         vs. State of M.P. (1995) 5 SCC 518, it was

                                         reiterated that in a case of a defective investigation,

                                         the court has to be circumspect in evaluating the

                                         evidence and may have to adopt an active and

                                         analytical role to ensure that truth is found by

                                         having recourse to Section 311 of the Code or at a

                                         later stage also resorting to Section 391 instead of

                                         throwing hands in the air in despair. It recalled as

                                         well its observations in Ram Bihari Yadav v. State

                                         of Bihar & others, (1998) 4 SCC 517 that the courts

                                         are installed for justice oriented mission and thus if

                                         a negligent investigation or omissions or lapses due

                                         to perfunctory investigation are not effectively

                                         rectified, the faith and confidence of the people

                                         would be shaken in the law enforcing agency and

                                         also in the institution devised for administration of

                                         justice.


                                         60. Though, as referred to hereinabove, trial was

                                         completed and the accused persons were acquitted,

                                         in the textual facts, this Court did direct retrial as

                                         prayed for, to avoid subversion of the justice

                                         delivery system and ordered the investigating

                                         agency or those supervising the investigation to act
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                               72




                                         in terms of Section 173(8) of the Code as the

                                         circumstances would so warrant.


                                         61. The observations and the propositions, though

                                         made in the backdrop of a request for retrial, those

                                         pertaining to the essentiality of a fair and complete

                                         investigation and trial as well as the solemn duty of

                                         the courts to ensure the discernment of truth to

                                         administer even handed justice as institutions of

                                         trust of public faith and confidence, are in our

                                         estimate, of universal application and binding

                                         effect, transcending the factual settings of a case.

                                         An adverse deduction vis-à-vis the quality of

                                         investigation and/a trial trivializing the cause of

                                         justice, is however the essential pre-requisite, for

                                         such remedial intervention by way of further

                                         investigation, reinvestigation, additional evidence,

                                         retrial etc. to be made objectively but assuredly for

                                         the furtherance of the salutary objectives of the

                                         justice dispensing system as contemplated in law, it

                                         being of paramount pre-eminence.


                                         62. This Court in Mohd. Hussain @ Julifikar Ali

                                         (2012)9 SCC 408 was also seized of a situation

                                         imploring for a retrial following the termination of

                                         the prosecution principally on account of delay,

                                         when juxtaposed to the demand for justice in cases
 Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                               73




                                         involving grave crimes affecting the society at

                                         large. The offence involved was under Sections

                                         302/307/
120
B
IPC
and
Sections 3
and
4
of the

                                         Explosive   Substances     Act,   1908    and    had

                                         perpetrated an explosion in a passenger carrying

                                         bus. This Court amongst others recalled its

                                         observations in
Kartar Singh vs. State of Punjab
(1994) 3 SCC 569 that while dispensing justice, the

                                         courts should keep in mind not only the liberty of

                                         the accused but also the interest of the victim and

                                         their near and dear ones and above all the

                                         collective interest of the community and the safety

                                         of the nation, so that the public, may not lose faith

                                         in the system of judicial administration and indulge

                                         in private retribution.
It however also took note of

                                         its ruling in
State of M.P. vs. Bhooraji and others
(2001) 7 SCC 679 that a de novo trial should be the

                                         last resort and that too only when such a course

                                         becomes desperately indispensable and should be

                                         limited to the extreme exigency to avert a failure of

                                         justice.
It noted with approval the observation in P.

                                         Ramachandra Rao (supra) that it is neither

                                         advisable nor feasible nor judicially permissible to

                                         draw or prescribe an outer limit for conclusion of

                                         all criminal proceedings and that the criminal

                                         courts are not obliged to terminate the trial or
Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                                 74
criminal proceedings merely on account of lapse of

                                           time. That such time limits cannot and will not by

                                           themselves be treated by any court as a bar to

                                           further continuance of the trial or proceedings or to

                                           terminate the same and acquit or discharge the

                                           accused, was emphatically underlined. Reference

                                           too was made of the decision in Zahira Habibulla

                                           H. Sheikh (2004) 4 SCC 158."
45. After scrutiny of the materials available on the record

        as well as the principle decided by the Apex Court, the following facts

        emerge out:-
I)      There happens to be violation of direction of the Hon‟ble

                                 Apex Court given under Rajvir @ Raju Case.


                         II)     There happens to be non-appreciation of the material

                                 available on the record to search out by the learned lower

                                 Court whether charge under
Section 302
I.P.C. is alterable

                                 or not.
III)    No step has been taken by the Court even during evidence

                                 of PW-6 and PW-7, who had exhibited the certified photo

                                 copy of fard-bayan of deceased, Aarti Devi which, on

                                 account of her death became dying declaration, to procure

                                 the original.
IV)     There should have been proper step at the end of the Court

                                 to procure original dying declaration.
Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                              75
V)      In spite of presence of Exhibit-1, the Court failed to

                                 confront the same to appellant during course of statement

                                 recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C.
VI)     The learned lower Court failed to consider that in the fard-
bayan the word dowry has been inserted in different pen

                                 and in likewise manner, lacks discloser over time elapsed

                                 since marriage.
VII)    The learned lower Court failed to consider the evidence of

                                 PW-9, informant as well as PW-10, husband of informant

                                 with regard to solemnization of marriage about 7-8 years

                                 ago since the death of deceased.
The aforesaid eventualities fell within the ambit of

                                 miscarriage of justice whereupon de novo trial is

                                 warranted.
46. Because of the fact that on account of grave

        illegality having been committed by the learned lower Court during

        conduction of trial leading to miscarriage of justice as held

        hereinabove. Though,
Section 221
of the Cr.P.C. does permit to

        convict an accused even if he is not charged and is found legally

        permissible in terms of
Section 464
Cr.P.C., but considering the fact

        that
Section 304B
I.P.C. as well as
Section 302
I.P.C. lie on different

        pedestal, prescribing two distinct criterion for consideration and

        further, considering the principle decided by the Apex Court in
Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.936 of 2016                                76
ShamSaheb M. Multtani vs. State of Karnataka
reported in (2001) 2

                   SCC 577, it has become abundantly clear that the appellants have to

                   be given an opportunity to defend themselves. That being so, the same

                   is set aside. Appeal is allowed. Matter is remitted back to the learned

                   lower Court to proceed afresh in light of finding recorded

                   hereinabove. Appellants are directed to be produced before the

                   learned lower Court.
(Aditya Kumar Trivedi, J)
Vikash/-
AFR/NAFR       A.F.R.
CAV DATE 30.06.2017
Uploading Date 01.08.2017
Transmission 01.08.2017
Date