SOURCE: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/769478/
SCRAPED: 2026-02-18T10:26:57.796813
TITLE: Full Document
================================================================================

[Cites
23
, Cited by
27
]
Madras High Court
R.Rajagopal @ R.R.Gopal @ Nakkheeran ... vs J.Jayalalitha on 6 April, 2006
Equivalent citations: AIR 2006 MADRAS 312, 2006 (6) AKAR (NOC) 850 (MAD), 2007 AIHC NOC 64, (2006) 2 MAD LJ 689, (2006) 2 MAD LW 377, (2006) 3 KER LT 147
Bench:
A.P.Shah
,
Prabha Sridevan
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS           

DATED: 06/04/2006  

CORAM   

THE HON'BLE MR. A.P.SHAH, CHIEF JUSTICE        
and 
THE HON'BLE MRS. JUSTICE PRABHA SRIDEVAN           

O.S.A.No.86 of 2006 
----------

1. R.Rajagopal @ R.R.Gopal @ Nakkheeran Gopal    
2. A.Kamaraj             ....  Appellants.

-Vs-

1. J.Jayalalitha
2. Mrs.N.Sassikala                 ..Respondents.


        PRAYER:  Appeal against the ad interim injunction order passed by a
learned single Judge of this Court dated 15.03.2006 in
Original Application No.599 of 2003 in C.S.No.477 of 2003.
-----------

!For Appellants         ::  Mr.P.T.Perumal

^For Respondents        ::  Mr.N.Jothi

-----------

:J U D G M E N T
(The  Judgment  of  the  Court  was delivered by The Honble The Chief
Justice)

        The first appellant, R.Rajagopal @ R.R.Gopal, is the  Editor,  Printer
and  Publisher  of  Nakkheeran, a bi-weekly magazine published from Chennai.
The second appellant, A.Kamaraj is the  Associate  Editor  of    Nakkheeran.
During  the period from 01.04.2003 to 20.06.2003, the appellants had published
certain articles in their magazine in relation to the  first  and  the  second
respondents.  The first respondent Selvi.  J.Jayalalitha is the Chief Minister
of the  State  of  Tamil  Nadu.    She  is  also  the General Secretary of the
political party, All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (A.I.A.D.M.K.).  The
second respondent Tmt.N.  Sassikala is a close friend of the first  respondent
and is  interested  in  the  welfare  of  the  first  respondent.    In all 24
publications made in 21 issues of Nakkheeran are the subject matter  of  the
present proceedings.
2.   The  respondents  filed a suit for injunction and damages against
the appellants  in  their  capacity  as  Editor,  Printer  and  Publisher  and
Associate Editor  of  Nakkheeran  respectively.  In the plaint, it is stated
that the first appellant was  arrested  by  the  police  under
Prevention  of
Terrorism  Act, 2002
on 12.04.2003 and has been detained in prison ever since.
From the said date, the magazine Nakkheeran, which is being published  as  a
bi-weekly on Tuesdays and Fridays of the week (now Thursdays and Sundays), has  
been  carrying  a  vilification  campaign  against  the  respondents  in their
magazine by printing false and defamatory articles  on  the  title  page  with
banner  headlines  as  well  as  on  the  cover page, apart from featuring the
photographs of either the first or the second respondent or both.  None of the
articles published against the respondents  has  been  found  to  be  true  or
published in  good  faith  after  prior  verification.    In  fact,  the first

appellant  has  always  been  indulging  in  character  assassination  of  the
respondents, and as a matter of fact, an earlier suit for damages filed by the
respondents against the first appellant is pending in this Court.
3.   It  is stated that the respondents are protected by
Article 21
of
the Constitution of India to live peacefully without being defamed with  false
and vituperative  articles  without  any proof therefor whatsoever.  There are
enough legal precedents available to prevent the appellants from printing  and
publishing such defamatory articles and if at all there was something relating
to  the  respondents  which  required  to  be published, the appellants may be
directed to verify with the respondents the veracity of the material  received
by them  apropos  of  the  activities  of  the respondents.  It is stated that
freedom of press does not mean that the appellants can pick and choose persons 
out of personal or political animosity, or monetary inducements with the  sole
idea of  defaming  them.   It is further stated in paragraphs 20 and 21 of the
plaint as follows:
20.  The freedom of speech in
Article 19(1)
of  the  Constitution  of
India  cannot  be  taken  to  mean absolute freedom to say or write whatever a
person chooses recklessly  without  regard  to  another  persons  honour  and
reputation.   The  right  guaranteed  by the Constitution, it must be borne in
mind, applies equally to every citizen.  Every right correspondents to a  duty
to the  other  and  is  also  to  be judged.  The right guaranteed is always a
qualified one.  Indeed, every  right  has  got  its  own  natural  limitation.
Holding  a  public  position does not mean that one should be at the receiving
end of attacks day-in-and-day-out nor it can be said that it is  an  appendage
to that office.
21.   It  is  not  a  question  of  mere ignorance about making vulgar
criticisms and hurting abuses against the plaintiffs, but  when  the  same  is
being  ceaselessly  done, beyond a reasonable period as a matter of right, the
plaintiffs have no reason to keep quite as if they are helpless in the matter.
Article 19
of the Constitution of India does not give a free hand,  under  the
guise  of  free expression and freedom of press, the right to go on publishing
defamatory  matters  and  articles  issue  after  issue  without   any   basis
whatsoever.
4.   It is stated that the balance of convenience is not only in favour of the
respondents, but it  is  also  absolutely  necessary  to  prevent  such  false
publications which  tend  to bring disrepute to the respondents.  It is stated
that the loss of reputation of the respondents and the mental agony caused  to
them cannot  be  compensated  by  payment  of  damages alone.  The respondents  
prayed in  the  suit  for  a  restraint  order  against  the  appellants  from
publishing   in   future  publications,  articles,  caricatures,  news  items,
cartoons, etc., defamatory or derogatory in nature,  in  the  Tamil  bi-weekly
Nakkheeran  or  in  any  special editions thereof or any publications of the
appellants without prior verification with the respondents.    The  claim  for
damages has  been  quantified at Rs.2 Crores and one thousand.  Along with the
plaint an application (O.A.No.599 of 2003) for interim relief under  Order  39
Rule  1  and  2  was  also filed praying for issuance of an order of temporary
injunction in the same terms.  The  respondents  were  granted  a  limited  ad
interim order restraining the appellants from publishing about private life of
respondent No.1 without prior verification.
5.  The  appellants filed a counter affidavit to the O.A.  and also prayed for
vacation of the ad interim order.  In the counter affidavit, it is stated that
in a libel action it is obligatory on the plaintiff to state in the plaint the
actual defamatory words (together with innuendo or defamatory meaning  thereof
where necessary)  in  specific  terms.  The respondents, however, have not set
out in the body of the plaint the alleged defamatory remarks contained in  the
impugned  publications  and thereby, the appellants are denied the opportunity
of knowing what was the nature of the imputations which are  objected  to  and
what was the meaning understood by the respondents of such imputations.  It is
stated  that  what  is  stated  in the articles relating to the respondents is
correct and the truth of the statement will be justified at the trial.  It  is
averred that in the discharge of their journalistic duties, sometimes, some of
the  fair  and  accurate  news  item  published in their magazine happen to be
unpalatable to persons in public positions and such public  persons  react  in
anger  and  disappointment  and  the  present  suit  is  an  outcome  of  such
intolerance.  It is stated that there was nothing defamatory in those articles
and the same were published in good faith and for public good.  It is  averred
that  the  claim  of the respondents is not supported by any material to prove
any of the publications in Nakkheeran as false  or  defamatory.    Both  the
respondents  are public persons and all their activities are matters of public
interest, because the first respondent is the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu and
leader of one of the  largest  political  parties  in  the  State.    She  has
subjected  herself to many public controversies and she has been always in the
media highlight.  So, all her  words  and  movements  are  matters  of  public
interest,  as  the  people  of  Tamil  Nadu  have  a  right  to know about her
activities.  It is further stated that during the period  1991  to  1996,  the
appellants  exposed  many  of  the  misdeeds  of the respondents, A.I.A.D.M.K.
Ministers  and  several  officials  and  as  a  consequence,   many   criminal
proceedings were initiated, which also ended in conviction.  It is stated that
verification  of  facts  with  the  person concerned cannot be the criteria in
deciding a matter as libel or defamatory.  Law does not recognize verification
of matter with the persons concerned.  It is customary  among  journalists  to
verify  the  facts with the person concerned and publish the matter along with
that persons version, but however, failure to do so is  not  unlawful.    The
plea  of  the  respondents  that  the appellants publish articles against them
without verification and, therefore, they must be  prevented  from  publishing
anything against  the  respondents  is  unsustainable  in  law.  It is further
stated that the  appellants  have  always  tried  to  verify  the  facts  with
respondents,  but the respondents are beyond the reach of the reporters of the
appellants.  In fact, when one of the reporters of  Nakkheeran  visited  the
house of  the then A.I.A.D.M.K.  Supremo in Tuticorin District, he was invited
inside the house and there, he was brutally attacked by A.I.A.D.M.K.  men.  In
this background, it is stated that though the appellants  very  much  want  to
verify   the   facts  with  the  respondents,  the  reporters  of  Nakkheeran
Publications will not get audience with the respondents.  In any event, it is
submitted that there is no provision in law to compel the appellants to verify
the matter with any one as long as the matter is based on truth, touching upon
public interest and is honestly believed to be true by the appellants.
6.  The learned single Judge after hearing the learned counsel for the parties
allowed the application of the respondents and granted  a  blanket  injunction
restraining  the  appellants  from publishing in future publications articles,
caricatures, news items, cartoons, etc., defamatory or derogatory in nature in
the Tamil bi-weekly Nakkheeran or any special editions  thereof  or  in  any
publications of the appellants till the disposal of the suit.
7.   The  learned  single Judge was of the view that though the appellants are
investigative journalists and the first  respondent  is  in  public  life  and
therefore,  in  respect  of  the  decisions taken by the first respondent, the
appellants are entitled to make a criticism, the law would require  that  such
criticism should  be  fair  and  should not exceed the bounds and limits.  The
learned single Judge referred to the issue of  Nakkheeran  dated  20.05.2003
containing the following article:
Even the  people  in Garden are also asking this question.  There is a secret
reason why J is showing  such  consideration  to  her  friend.    Though  in
politics no big political party is presently having a tie-up with J, several
diseases are having a tie-up in Js body.  That is why, she is taking 4500 Mg.
of tablets everyday.  When the doctors have restricted her from taking certain
things  while she is taking the tablets, she is consuming those things without
any restriction.  It is only Sasikala who gives the tablets and  other  things
to J.
According  to  the  learned  single Judge, a very reading of the above article
would not only reflect the character assassination  of  the  respondents,  but
also indicates that the appellants have exceeded their limits.
8.   The  appellants,  aggrieved by the aforesaid order of the learned
single Judge, have preferred the present appeal.
9.  We have heard Mr.P.T.Perumal, learned counsel  appearing  for  the
appellants  and  Mr.N.Jothi,  learned counsel appearing for the respondents at
length and have perused the records in the case.
10.  Mr.P.T.Perumal, learned counsel for the appellants, has contended  before
us  that  the  impugned  injunction order is against the settled principles of
law.  No  blanket  injunction  can  be  granted  restraining  the  press  from
publishing anything  of  defamatory  nature  in  the future.  Such an order is
clearly violative of the  freedom  of  speech  and  expression  guaranteed  by
Article 19(1)(a)
of the Constitution of India.  Mr.Perumal has contended that
the interim relief sought for  was  not  to  publish  articles  without  prior
verification  with  the  respondents,  whereas  the  learned  single Judge has
granted an order of injunction in a blanket manner, much more  than  what  was
prayed for  by  the respondents.  Mr.Perumal has contended that the appellants
have categorically affirmed and stood by what they  had  published  by  making
such an  averment  in  the counter affidavit.  In such a situation, Mr.Perumal
contends, that there could have been no action at all for any injunction,  and
the relief,  if  any,  is  by  way  of damages.  Learned counsel has drawn our
attention to the relief claimed in the plaint where damages have in fact  been
claimed.  He has further contended that there is no defamation if the impugned
articles are analysed and in any case once the appellants stand by them, truth
would be  available  as  a  defense  to  defamation.  Learned counsel has also
submitted that the respondents are public figures and such public figures  are
subject  to  public  gaze including in respect of their private life at times.
He has contended that in law the position of public figures is  different  and
in  case  of  violation  of  right  of  their privacy the remedy is action for
damages and not of preventive injunction which would amount to  precensorship.
He  has also contended that the justification or claim of truth is an absolute
defense and there is no right of privacy available to an individual in such  a
case.   He  has contended that the first respondent is the Chief Minister of a
State and General Secretary of an important political party in the  State  and
everything  which  happened within or outside of her household was of interest
to public and thus the appellants have a right to comment and write about  the
same.   He  has  submitted  that insofar as public figures and politicians are
concerned their lives are  day-in-and-day-out  brought  under  microscope  and
commented upon.    There  cannot be segregation of private life of such public
figures from their public life, as both are intertwined.   It  is,  therefore,
contended  that by the very nature of being a public figure such persons life
is entitled to be scrutinized, whether in respect of their public function  or
their private  life.    As regards the article dated 20.05.2003 referred to in
the order of the learned single Judge learned counsel has contended  that  the
imputation  contained  in  that  article  has  not  been set out in the plaint
together  with  the  alleged  innuendo  or  defamatory  meaning  thereof,  and
therefore, no  relief  can  be  based  on  the  said  article.   In any event,
according to Mr.Perumal the Court can at best direct  the  publishers  not  to
repeat  publishing  the said article, but a blanket injunction restraining the
publishers  from  publishing  any  article  in  future  runs  counter  to  the
fundamental  right  to  freedom  of speech and expression enshrined in
Article
19(1)(a)
of the Constitution of India.  Mr.Perumal relied  upon  a  number  of
decisions  of  the  Supreme Court as well as High Courts and also decisions by
American and English Courts to which we shall shortly refer to.
11.  Mr.N.Jothi, learned counsel for the respondents, on the other hand,  made
submissions  for  sustaining  the impugned interim order of the learned single
judge and contended that the reputation of an individual and his/her right  to
privacy  are both protected and it is apparent from the impugned articles that
such rights of the respondents were sought to be violated  by  the  appellants
with impunity.    In  such a situation, Mr.Jothi contended that the remedy was
available both by way of damages and by way of injunction.  He contended  that
what is implicit in the article dated 20.05.2003 is that the second respondent
is  giving  liquor  to first respondent although she had been forbidden by the
doctors from taking any such thing.  According to him the article is malicious
and beyond all limits of decency and consequently, no fault can be found  with
the order  of  injunction.    Mr.Jothi submitted that there were two competing
interests which had to be balanced i.e., right  of  the  press  to  write  and
publish,  and  right  of an individual against invasion of his/her privacy and
threat of defamation.  Eventhough, the appellants were standing by  what  they
had written,  the truth and veracity of the same is yet to be established.  On
the other  hand,  the  right  of  the  individual  for  privacy  is  far  from
sacrosanct.  Mr.    Jothi contends that no one has a right to publish anything
concerning personal private matters without  consent    whether  truthful  or
otherwise, whether  laudatory  or critical.  He contends that since admittedly
no consent of the respondents had been taken by the appellants to write  about
their  private  life,  this  was  a  clear  case of invasion of privacy of the
respondents, and in such a situation, it is not necessary that one  must  wait
for  the  publication  and  then claim damages, but a preventive action can be
taken so that the respondents right to privacy is not violated.  He submitted
that the courts have always protested against the notion that  they  ought  to
allow  a wrong to continue simply because the wrongdoer is able and willing to
pay for the injury he may inflict.    The  right  to  freedom  of  speech  and
expression,  he  contends,  cannot be taken to mean absolute freedom to say or
write whatever a person chooses recklessly and without  regard  to  the  other
persons honour  or  reputation.    He contends that the plea of justification
would be available where truth was pleaded and it was in public interest.   In
case  of  a  public  figure,  he contends, that it may apply to performance of
public duties by the public figures and it does not give a licence to go  into
the private  life  of  such  public  figures.    In the alternative, it is the
submission of the learned counsel that having regard  to  the  fact  that  the
appellants  were  indulging  in character assassination the least they must be
asked to do  is  to  seek  prior  verification  from  the  respondents  before
publishing  any  articles  and  also  publish  the  denial,  if  any,  of  the
respondents.  Mr.Jyoti also referred to a number of decisions of  the  Supreme
Court and High Courts.
12.   We  have duly considered the elaborate submissions and a large number of
decisions cited at the bar by the learned counsel for the parties.  The matter
was heard in depth, as the decision in this case would have direct bearing  on
the  claims  of right of privacy by public figures as against the right of the
press to publish and write about such public figures.
13.  We may mention at this stage that we  have  been  taken  through  all  24
impugned articles  published  in  the appellants magazine Nakkheeran.  At the
outset we may mention that none of the articles other than the  article  dated
20.05.2003,  referred  to  in  the  order of the learned single Judge, and the
article published on 06.06.2003 can be said to be  relating  to  the  personal
life of the first respondent.  The article dated 06.06.2003 is about the first
respondent  taking  advice  from  an astrologer in respect of certain criminal
case pending against her.  The rest of the  articles  are  about  her  actions
pertaining to  official  and  public  function.  In some of the articles it is
alleged that the first respondent is behaving  in  a  dictatorial  manner  and
using police  to  suppress  dissent and had been likened with Hitler.  In some
there are allegations of misdeeds and misdemeanor in official duties.  Out  of
24  articles  the  name  of  the second respondent appears only in 5 articles.
None of the articles/imputations are reproduced in the plaint.  In paragraph 
9 of the plaint it is merely stated that the respondents are  restricting  the
description  of  such  defamatory  articles  since they are fully indicated in
Document No.1 filed along with the plaint.  Document No.1  is  compilation  of
the 24  publications which are said to be defamatory.
It is nowhere stated in
the plaint that in what way the articles and the materials in the articles are
defamatory and if they are not per se defamatory the innuendo implied  in  the
articles is  also  not  set  out.    It is well settled that in a libel action
defamatory words must be set out in the plaint where the words are per  se  or
prima  facie defamatory, and where the defamatory sense is not apparent on the
face of the words, the defamatory meaning as it is technically known  in  law,
the innuendo  must  also  to be set out in a clear and specific terms.  In the
absence of these necessary averments the plaint would be liable to be rejected
on the ground that it does not disclose any cause of  action.    (See  Brijlal
Prasad Vs.   Mahant Lal Das, AIR 1940 Nagpur 125, Krishna Rao Vs.  Radhakisan,
AIR 1956 Nagpur 264,  W.Hay  Vs.    Ashwini  Kumar
,  AIR  1958  Calcutta  269,
Purushottam Lal Vs.  Prem Shankar, AIR 1966 Allahabad 377)
14.   With  these preliminary observations, we may now proceed to deal
with the appellants submissions based on the right of freedom of  speech  and
expression guaranteed  under
Article 19(1)(a)
of the Constitution.  Though the
Indian Constitution does not use the expression  freedom of press in
Article
19
, but it is included as one of the guarantees in
Article 19(1)(a).
The  law
on  this  aspect  has been adverted to in the decision of the Supreme Court in
Indian Express Newspapers ( Pvt.) Ltd.  Vs.  Union of India
(1985 (1) SCC 641)
where Venkataramaiah, J.  referred to the importance of freedom of press in  a
democratic society  and the role of courts.  The freedom of press, as noted by
Venkataramaiah, J., is  one  of  the  items  around  which  the  greatest  and
bitterest  constitutional  struggles  have  been  waged in all countries where
liberal constitutions prevail.
Article 19
of  the  Universal  Declaration  of
Human Rights, 1948 declares the freedom of press and so does
Article 19
of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966.
Article 10
of the
European Convention on Human Rights, provides as follows:  -
Article 10.  (1) Everyone has the right to freedom of expression.  This right
shall  include  freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart information
and  ideas  without  interference  by  public  authority  and  regardless   of
frontiers.  This Article shall not prevent States from requiring the licensing
of broadcasting, television or cinema enterprises.
(2)  The  exercise  of  these  freedoms,  since  it carries with it duties and
responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions
or penalties as are prescribed by  law  and  are  necessary  in  a  democratic
society,  in  the  interests  of  national  security, territorial integrity or
public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection  of
health  or  morals,  for the protection of the reputation or rights of others,
for preventing the disclosure of information received in  confidence,  or  for
maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.

        The  First  Amendment  to  the  Constitution  of the U.S.A provides as
follows:  -
 Amendment 1.  Congress shall make no law  respecting  all  establishment  or
religion,  or  prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom
of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to  assemble,
and to petition the government for a redress of grievances.
15.   Our  Constitution  is not absolute with respect to the freedom of speech
and  expression,  as  enshrined  by  the  First  Amendment  to  the   American
Constitution.  But this right is subject to reasonable restrictions on grounds
set out  in
Article  19(2)
of the Constitution.  Reasonable limitation can be
put in the interest of sovereignty and integrity of India, the secrecy of  the
State,  friendly  relationship  with  foreign  state, public order, decency or
morality or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement  of  an
offence.   The  effect  of
Article 19
on the freedom of press, was analysed in
the decision of the Supreme Court in
Indian  Express  Newspapers  (Pvt.)  Ltd.
Vs.  Union  of  India
(1959 SCR 12) where Bhagwati, J.  after referring to the
Supreme Courts earlier decision in
Romesh Thapar Vs.  State  of  Madras
(AIR
195 0 SC 124) and Brij Bhushan Vs.  State of Delhi (AIR 1950 SC 129) expressed 
his   view   that  these  were  the  only  two  decisions  which  evolved  the
interpretation of
Article 19(1)(a)
of the Constitution,  and  they  only  laid
down that the freedom of speech and expression included freedom of propagation
of  ideas which freedom was ensured by the freedom of circulation and that the
liberty of  the  press  consisted  in  allowing  no  previous  restraint  upon
publication.
Referring  to  the  fact  that  there is a considerable body of
authority to be found in the decisions of the Supreme Court of America bearing
on this concept of freedom of speech and expression, Bhagwati,  J.    observed
that  it  was  trite  knowledge  that  the fundamental right to the freedom of
speech  and  expression  enshrined  in  our  constitution  was  based  on  the
provisions  in  the First Amendment to the Constitution of USA, and, hence, it
would be legitimate and proper to refer to  those  decisions  of  the  Supreme
Court of USA, in order to appreciate the true nature, scope and extent of this
right,  in  spite  of the warning administered by the Court against the use of
American and other cases, in
State of Trivancore, Cochin Vs.  Bombay Co.  Ltd.
(AIR 1952 SC 356) and State of Bombay Vs.  R.M.D.  Chamarbaughwala  (AIR  1957    
SC 699).
16.  The U.S.   Supreme Court in New York Times Co.  v.  Sullivan, 376
US 254; Garrison v.  Lousiana, 379 US 64; Curtis Publishing Co.   v.    Butts,
388 US 130, Time, Inc.  v.  Hill, 385 US 374 and like cases has laid down that
the  defense  of  truth  is constitutionally required where the subject of the
publication is a public official or public figure.  What is more, the  defamed
public  official  or public figure must prove not only that the publication is
false, but that it was knowingly so or was circulated with reckless  disregard
for its  truth  or  falsity.  Similarly where the interest at issue is privacy
rather than  reputation  and  the  right  claimed  is  to  be  free  from  the
publication of false or misleading information about ones affairs, the target
of  the  publication  must  prove  knowing  or  reckless  falsehood  where the
materials published, although  assertedly  private,  are  matters  of  public
interest.      In New York  Times  Co.  v.  Sullivan, 376 US 254, Brandeis, J
observed:  -
 A rule compelling the critic of official conduct to guarantee the  truth  of
all his factual assertions  and to do so on pain of libel judgments virtually
unlimited in  amount    leads to a comparable selfcensorship.  Allowance of
the defense of truth, with the burden of proving it on the defendant, does not
mean that only false speech will be deterred.    Even  courts  accepting  this
defense  an  adequate  safeguard  have recognised the difficulties of adducing
legal proofs that the alleged libel was true in all its  factual  particulars.
See, e.g., Post Publishing  Co.    V.    Hallam,  59  F.530,  540  (C.A.   6th
Cir.1893); see also Noel, Defamation of Public  officers  and  Candidates,  49
Col.L.Rev.  87 5, 892 (1949).  Under such a rule, would-be critics of official
conduct  may  be  deterred  from  voicing  their  criticism, even though it is
believed to be true and even though it is  in  fact  true,  because  of  doubt
whether  it  can be proved in court or fear of the expense of having to do so.
They tend to make only statements which  steer  far  wider  of  the  unlawful
zone.  Speiser V.    Randall, supra, 357 U.S., at 526.  The rule thus dampens
the vigor and limits the variety of public debate.  It  is  inconsistent  with
the First and Fourteen th Amendments.
The constitutional guarantees require, we think, a federal rule that prohibits
a  public official from recovering damages for a defamatory falsehood relating
to his official conduct unless he proves that  the  statement  was  made  with
actual  malice   that is, with knowledge that it was false or with reckless
disregard of whether it was false or not.
17.  It will be useful also to refer to the  observations  of  Justice
Brennan in Time, Inc.  v.  Hill, 385 US 374
  The  guarantees  for  speech  and  press  are not the preserve of political
expression or comment upon public affairs, essential as those are  to  healthy
government.  One need only pick up any newspaper or magazine to comprehend the   
vast  range  of  published  matter  which exposes persons to public view, both
private citizens and public officials.  Exposure of  the  self  to  others  is
varying degrees  is  a concomitant of life in a civilized community.  The risk
of this exposure is an essential incident of life in a society which places  a
primary value  on  freedom of speech and of press.  Freedom of discussion, if
it would fulfill its historic function in this nation, must embrace all issues
about which information is needed or appropriate  to  enable  the  members  of
society to cope with the exigencies of their period.
        As  James  Madison said, Some degree of abuse is inseparable from the
proper use of every thing; and in no instance is this more true than  in  that
of  the  press 4 Elliots Debates on the Federal Constitution 571 (1876 ed.).
We create a grave risk of serious impairment of the indispensable service of a
free press in a free society if we saddle the press with the impossible burden
of verifying to a certainty the facts associated in  news  articles  w  ith  a
persons  name, picture or portrait, particularly as related to non-defamatory
matter.  Even negligence would be a most elusive standard, especially when the
content of the speech itself affords no warning of prospective harm to another
through falsity.  A negligence test would place on the press  the  intolerable
burden  of  guessing how a jury might assess the reasonableness of steps taken
by it to verify the  accuracy  of  every  reference  to  a  name,  picture  or
portrait.
18.  In  Cox  Broadcasting  Corporation  v.    Cohn,  420  US 469, the
identity of a 17 year old deceased rape victim was obtained  by  a  television
newsman from  official  court  records  open  to  the  public.  In response to
television newscasts in which the victim was identified by name, the father of
the victim brought an action against the newsman and the television station in
the Superior Court  of  Fulton  County,  Georgia,  for  invasion  of  privacy,
grounding  his  cause  of  action  on  a  Georgia criminal statute making it a
misdemeanor to publish or broadcast the name or identity of any  rape  victim.
In  an opinion by White, J expressing the view of six members of the Court, it
was held that  protection of freedom of press under the First and  Fourteenth
Amendments  barred the state from making the defendants television broadcasts
the basis of civil liability when  there  was  no  contention  that  the  rape
victims  name  had been obtained in an improper fashion or that it was not on
an official court document open to public inspection.
19.  In Derbyshire County Council v.  Times Newspaper Limited, 1993 (1
) All.ER page 1011), it was held by House of Lords that  under  common  law  a
local  authority  did not have the right to maintain an action for damages for
defamation as it would be contrary to the public interest for  the  organs  of
the government,  whether  central  or local, to have that right.  Not only was
there no public interest favouring the  right  of  government  organs  to  sue
libel,  but  it  was of the highest public importance that a governmental body
should be open to uninhibited  public  criticism,  and  a  right  to  sue  for
defamation would  place  an  undesirable  fetter on freedom of speech.  It was
held that the propositions endorsed by the US Supreme Court in New York  Times 
Co.  V.    Sullivan  (supra)  though related directly to the provisions of the
American Constitution concerned with securing freedom of  speech,  the  public
interest  considerations  which  underlaid  them  are  no  less  valid in this
country.  What has been described as the  Chilling  Effect  induced  by  the
threat of civil action for libel is very important.
20.  In  Hector  v.   A-G of Antigua and Barbuda, (1990) 2 All ER, 103
the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council held that  a  statutory  provision
which  made  the  printing  or  distribution  of any false statement likely to
undermine public confidence in  the  conduct  of  public  affairs  a  criminal
offence  contravened  the provisions of the constitution protecting freedom of
speech.  Lord Bridge of Harwich observed:  -
In a free democratic society it is almost too obvious to  need  stating  that
those  who  hold  office  in  government  and  who  are responsible for public
administration must always be open to criticism.  Any  attempt  to  stifle  or
fetter  such  criticism  amounts to political censorship of the most insidious
and objectionable kind.  At the same time it is no less obvious that the  very
purpose  of  criticism leveled at those who have the conduct of public affairs
by their political opponents  is  to  undermine  public  confidence  in  their
stewardship  and  to  persuade  the electorate that the opponents would make a
better job of if than those presently holding office.  In the light  of  these
considerations their Lordships cannot help viewing a statutory provision which
criminalizes  statements  likely to undermine public confidence in the conduct
of public affairs with the utmost suspicion.
21.  We may now refer to the judgment of the Supreme Court in celebrated  case
of
R.  Rajagopal  @  R.R.    Gopal  vs.   State of Tamil Nadu
[(1994) 6 S.C.C.
632].  The said case dealt with the right  of  privacy  of  citizens  of  this
country  and the parameters of the right of the press to criticize and comment
on acts and conduct of public officials.  The  case  related  to  the  alleged
autobiography  of  Auto  Shankar  who was convicted and sentenced to death for
committing six murders.  In the autobiography, he had commented on his contact
and relations with various police officials.  It was the stand of  the  police
that the  autobiography  was not authored by Auto Shankar.  It was stated that
neither Auto Shankar nor his wife were made parties before the  Supreme  Court
in the writ petition filed under
Article 32
of the Constitution.  The right of
privacy  of citizens was dealt with by the Supreme Court in paragraph 9 in the
following terms:  -
" The right to privacy  as  an  independent  and  distinctive  concept
originated  in  the  field  of Tort law, under which a new cause of action for
damages resulting from unlawful invasion of  privacy  was  recognised.    This
right  has  two  aspects  which  are  but two faces of the same coin  (1) the
general law of privacy which affords a tort action for damages resulting  from
an  unlawful  invasion of privacy and (2) the constitutional recognition given
to the right to privacy  which  protects  personal  privacy  against  unlawful
governmental invasion.    The  first aspect of this right must be said to have
been violated where, for example, a persons name or likeness is used, without
his consent, for advertising  or  non-advertising    purposes  or  for  that
matter,  his  life  story  is  written   whether laudatory or otherwise  and
published without his consent as explained  hereinafter.    In  recent  times,
however, this right has acquired a constitutional status.  We shall proceed to
explain how?  Right to privacy is not enumerated as a fundamental right in our
Constitution but has been inferred from Article 21   
        There are  two  possible theories for protecting privacy of home.  The
first is that activities in the home harm others only to the extent that  they
cause  offence  resulting  from  the  mere  thought  that individuals might be
engaging in such activities and  that  such  harm  is  not  constitutionally
protectible by  the  State.    The  second is that individuals need a place of
sanctuary where they can be free from societal control.    The  importance  of
such  a  sanctuary  is  that individuals can drop the mask, desist for a while
from projecting on the world the image they want to be accepted as themselves,
an image that may reflect the values of their peers rather than the  realities
of their natures.
The  right  to  privacy  in  any  event  will necessarily have to go through a
process of case-by-case development.  Therefore, even assuming that the  right
to  personal  liberty,  the  right  to move freely throughout the territory of
India and the freedom of speech create an independent right of privacy  as  an
emanation  from  them which one can characterize as a fundamental right, we do
not think that the right is absolute.

The Supreme Court, thereafter, proceeded to refer to various decisions of  the
Indian  Courts starting with the first decision of the Supreme Court in Kharak
Singh vs.  State of Uttar Pradesh  [A.I.R.    1963  S.C.    1295],  which  was
subsequently elaborated  in
Gobind  vs.    State  of Madhya Pradesh
[(1975) 2
S.C.C.  148].  The right to privacy as enunciated by the Courts of the  United
States and  England were also discussed in great depth.  The Supreme Court was 
of the view that the principles enunciated in the various
judgments
referred
to  above
were  applicable  to public figures and they often played a crucial
role in regulating an orderly society and the citizens had  a  legitimate  and
substantial interest  in the conduct of such persons.  Thus, the Supreme Court
was of  the  opinion  that  the  freedom  of  Press  extends  to  engaging  in
uninhibited  debate  about  the involvement of public figures in public issues
and events.  The Supreme Court felt that a proper balance of  the  freedom  of
press  as  well  as  the right of privacy and defamation has to be struck in a
democratic way of life as contemplated by our Constitution.  The Supreme Court
concluded that the State or its officials have no authority in law to impose a
prior restraint upon publication of materials, defamatory of the State  or  of
its officials.
The Supreme Court quoted, with approval, the observations in
New York Times vs.  United States to the  effect  that  any  system  of  prior
restraints  of  freedom  of  expression  comes  to  this Court bearing a heavy
presumption against its constitutional validity and that in  such  cases,  the
Government "carries a heavy burden of showing justification for the imposition
of  such  a  restraint."  The  Supreme  Court  thus  held  that  the remedy of
the public figure would arise only after the publication is made and would  be
governed by the principles indicated in the judgment and that there was no law
under  which they could prevent the publication of a material on the ground of
such material being likely to be defamatory of them.  Even in that  case,  the
remedy was  only  after  the publication.
In paragraph 26 of the report in
R.
Rajagopal
's case, the broad principles summarized  by  the  Supreme  Court  as
under :
"  (1)  The  right  to  privacy  is  implicit in the right to life and liberty
guaranteed to the citizens of this country by
Article 21.
It is a  right  to
be let alone.  A citizen has a right to safeguard the privacy of his own, his
family,  marriage,  procreation,  motherhood, childbearing and education among
other matters.  None can publish anything concerning the above matters without
his consent  whether truthful or otherwise and whether laudatory or critical.
If he does so, he would be violating  the  right  to  privacy  of  the  person
concerned and  would  be  liable  in  an  action  for  damages.  Position may,
however,  be  different,  if  a  person  voluntarily  thrusts   himself   into
controversy or voluntarily invites or raises a controversy.
(2)  The  rule  aforesaid  is  subject  to the exception, that any publication
concerning the aforesaid aspects becomes unobjectionable if  such  publication
is based  upon public records including court records.  This is for the reason
that once a matter becomes a matter of public record, the right to privacy  no
longer  subsists  and it becomes a legitimate subject for comment by press and
media among others.  We are, however, of the opinion that in the interests  of
decency  [
Article 19(2)]
an exception must be carved out to this rule, viz., a
female who is the victim of a sexual assault,  kidnap,  abduction  or  a  like
offence  should  not further be subjected to the indignity of her name and the
incident being publicised in press/media.
(3) There is yet another exception to the rule in (1) above  indeed, this  is
not an exception but an independent rule.  In the case of public officials, it
is  obvious,  right  to  privacy, or for that matter, the remedy of action for
damages is simply not  available  with  respect  to  their  acts  and  conduct
relevant to the discharge of their official duties.  This is so even where the
publication  is based upon facts and statements which are not true, unless the
official establishes that the publication was made  (by  the  defendant)  with
reckless disregard  for  truth.    In  such a case, it would be enough for the
defendant ( member of the press or media) to  prove  that  he  acted  after  a
reasonable  verification  of  the  facts; it is not necessary for him to prove
that what he has written is true.  Of course, where the publication is  proved
to  be false and actuated by malice or personal animosity, the defendant would
have no defence and would be liable for damages.  It is equally  obvious  that
in  matters  not  relevant to the discharge of his duties, the public official
enjoys the same protection as any other citizen, as explained in (1)  and  (2)
above.   It  needs  no  reiteration  that judiciary, which is protected by the
power to  punish  for  contempt  of  court  and  Parliament  and  legislatures
protected  as their privileges are by
Articles 105
and
104
respectively of the
Constitution of India, represent exceptions to this rule.
(4)  So  far  as  the  Government,  local  authority  and  other  organs   and
institutions exercising governmental power are concerned, they cannot maintain
a suit for damages for defaming them.
(5)  Rules  3 and 4 do not, however, mean that
Official Secrets Act, 19
23, or
any similar enactment or provision having the force of law does not  bind  the
press or media.
(6)  There  is no law empowering the State or its officials to prohibit, or to
impose a prior restraint upon the press/media.
22.
In
Kartar Singh v.  State of Punjab
, AIR 1956 SC  541,  Bhagwati,
J.  (as he then was) in paragraph-12 observed as follows:-
These  slogans  were  certainly  defamatory of the Transport Minister and the
Chief Minister of the Punjab Government but the redress of the  grievance  was
personal  to  these  individuals  and the State authorities could not take the
cudgels on their behalf by having recourse to
S.9
of the Act unless and  until
the  defamation  of  these  individuals was prejudicial to the security of the
State or the maintenance of public order.
So, far as these individuals were concerned, they  did  not  take  any
notice  of these vulgar abuses and appeared to have considered the whole thing
as beneath their notice.  Their conduct in this behalf was consistent with the
best traditions of democracy.  Those who fill a public position  must  not  be
too thin  skinned  in  reference  to  comments made upon them.  It would often
happen that observations would be made upon public men which  they  know  from 
the bottom of their hearts were undeserved and unjust; yet they must bear with
them  and submit to be misunderstood for a time. (per Cockburn,C.J in Seymour
v.  Butterworth , (1862) 3 F&F 372 (376,377(a)  and  see  the  dicta  of  the
Judges in
R.  v.  Sir R.Carden
(1879) 5 QBD).
(B) Whoever  fills a public position renders himself open thereto.  He
must accept appendage to  this  office.    (Per  Bramwell  B.,  In  Kelly  v.
Sherlock, (1866) 1 QB 686 (689)
        (C)  Public  men  in  such  positions may as well think it worth their
while to ignore such vulgar criticisms and abuses hurled against  them  rather
than give an importance to the same by prosecuting the persons responsible for
the same.
23.   Thus  law  is  well  settled  that  so  far as Government, local
authority and other organs and institutions exercising governmental power  are
concerned, they  cannot maintain a suit for damages for defaming them.  In the
case of public officials, the remedy of  action  for  damages  is  simply  not
available  with respect to their acts and conduct relevant to the discharge of
their official duties and this is so even where the publication is based  upon
the  facts  and statements which are not true, unless the official establishes
that the publication was made (by the defendant) with reckless  disregard  for
truth.   In  such  a case, it would be enough for the defendant (member of the
press or media) to prove he acted  after  a  reasonable  verification  of  the
facts;  it is not necessary for him to prove that what he has written is true.
In respect of private matters, none  can  publish  such  matters  without  his
consent, but the position would be different if he voluntarily thrusts himself
into controversy or voluntarily invites or raises a controversy.
24.   In  the  instant  case,  the  appellants  have  taken  a plea of
justification and the effect of such justification plea has been considered in
several judicial pronouncements.  The first of such cases is Fraser vs.  Evans
[(1969) 1 All E.R.  8], where Lord Denning has observed :
" The Court will not restrain the  publication  of  an  article,  even
though it is defamatory, when the defendant says that he intends to justify it
or to  make  fair  comment  on  a  matter  of  public interest.  That has been
established for many years since  Bonnard  v.    Perryman  (1).    The  reason
sometimes given is that the defences of justification and fair comment are for
the  jury,  which  is  the constitutional tribunal, and not for a judge; but a
better reason is the importance in the public interest that the  truth  should
be out.
25.  The  next  is the decision in Harakas vs.  Baltic Mercantile and Shipping
Exchange Ltd.  [(1982) 2 All E.R.  701], again Lord Denning observed :
" This cases raises a matter of  principle  which  must  be  observed.
This  Court  never grants an injunction in respect of libel when it is said by
the defendant that the words are true and that he is going  to  justify  them.
So  also,  when  an  occasion  is protected by qualified privilege, this Court
never grants an injunction to restrain a slander or libel, to prevent a person
from exercising that privilege, unless it is shown  that  what  the  defendant
proposes  to say is known by him to be untrue so that it is clearly malicious.
So long as he proposes to say  that  he  honestly  believes  to  be  true,  no
injunction should  be granted against him.  That was made clear in Quartz Hill
Consolidated Gold Mining Co.  v.  Beal, (1882) 20 Ch I) 501.
26.  The same view has been adopted by the Division Bench of the  Bombay  High 
Court  in  Appeal  No.464  of 1989 from Notice of Motion No.48 of 1989 in Suit
No.3907 of 1988 in the case of Dr.   Yashwant  Trivedi  vs.    Indian  Express
Newspapers (Bombay) Pvt.  Ltd.  decided on 29.6.1989 and the ratio in the case
of Harakas vs.    Baltic Mercantile and Shipping Exchange Ltd.  (supra) and in
particular, the portion quoted above has been approved.   The  Division  Bench
also observed :
"  The  crux  of  the  matter  is  that  when in a libel action at the
interlocutory stage the defendant raises plea of justification and, as in this
case, mentions evidence by which he might substantiate his case, the Court  is
unlikely  to  grant  an interlocutory injunction in favour of the plaintiff to
restrain further publication of the alleged libel.
In the said judgment, the passage appearing  in  the  Treatise  on  Libel  and
Slander  by Gatley Eighth Edition, has been cited with approval, which is also
quoted hereinbelow :
" 1574.  Justification:  When the defendant swears  that  he  will  be
able  to justify the words  unless the Court is satisfied that he will not be
able to do so.  The validity of a justification, if pleaded,  is  eminently  a
matter to  be  determined  by a verdict of a jury.  When once a defendant says


that he is going to justify the words complained of, there is an  end  of  the
case  so  far as an interim injunction is concerned, although in a proper case
it may be that the Court will intervene on the ground of breach of confidence
27.  Finally we may refer to the decision of the Supreme Court  in
S.
Rangarajan v.  P.Jagajivan Ram
, (1989) 2 SCC 574 where the Court held that the
freedom of speech and expression should not be suppressed unless the situation
created  by  allowing  the  freedom are pressing and the community interest is
endangered, and it is not simply a case of balancing of two  interests  as  if
they are  of equal weight.  In this connection, the observations in paragraphs
41 to 45 of
the said judgment
are  relevant  and  accordingly  are  reproduced
below:  -
41.   When  men  differ  in  opinion,  both  sides ought equally to have the
advantage of being heard by the public.  (Benjamin  Franklin).    If  one  is
allowed  to  say  that policy of the government is good, another is with equal
freedom entitled to say that it is bad.  If one  is  allowed  to  support  the
governmental scheme, the other could as well say, that he will not support it.
The different views are allowed to be expressed by proponents and opponent not
because  they  are  correct,  or  valid  but  because there is freedom in this
country for expressing even differing views on any issue.
42.  Alexander Meiklejohn perhaps the foremost American philosopher of freedom
of expression, in his wise little study neatly explains:
When men govern themselves, it is they  and no one  else    who  must  pass  
judgment upon  unwisdom and unfairness and danger.  And that means that unwise  
ideas must have a hearing as well  as  wise  ones  unfair  as  well  as  fair,
dangerous as well as  safe,  unAmerican as well...  American.  ...  If then on
any occasion in the United States it is allowable, in that situation,  to  say
that  the  Constitution  is  a  good document it is equally allowable, in that
situation, to say that the Constitution is  a  bad  document.    If  a  public
building  may  be  used  in  which  to  say,  in  time of war, that the war is
justified, then the same building may be used in which to say that it  is  not
justified.   If  it  be publicly argued that conscription for armed service is
moral and necessary, it may likewise be publicly argued that it is immoral and
unnecessary.  If it may be  said  that  American  political  institutions  are
superior  to those of England or Russia or Germany, it may with equal freedom,
be said that those of England or Russia  or  Germany  are  superior  to  ours.
These  conflicting views may be expressed, must be expressed, not because they 
are valid, but because they are relevant....  To be afraid of ideas, any idea,
is to be unfit for self-government.
He argued, if we may say so correctly,  that  the  guarantees  of  freedom  of
speech  and  of  the  press are measures adopted by the people as the ultimate
rulers  in  order  to  retain  control  over  the  government,  the   peoples
legislative and executive agents.
43.  Brandies,  J.,  in  Whitney  v.   California propounded probably the most
attractive free speech theory :
...  that the greatest menace to freedom is an inert  people  ;  that  public
discussion is a  political duty ;.  ..  It is hazardous to discourage thought,
hope and imagination ; that the path of safety  lies  in  the  opportunity  to
discuss  freely  supposed  grievances  and  proposed  remedies  ; and that the
fitting remedy for evil counsels is good ones.
44.  What Archibald Cox said in his article though  on  "First  Amendment"  is
equally relevant here:
Some propositions  seem true or false beyond rational debate.  Some false and
harmful, political and religious doctrine gain wide public acceptance.   Adolf
Hitlers brutal  theory of a master race is sufficient example.  We tolerate
such foolish and sometimes dangerous appeals not because they may  prove  true 
but because freedom of speech is indivisible.  The liberty cannot be denied to
some ideas and  saved  for  others.   The reason is plain enough :  no man, no
committee,  and  surely  no  government,   has   the   infinite   wisdom   and
disinterestedness  accurately  and  unselfishly  to separate what is true from
what is debatable, and both from what is false.  To license one to impose  his
truth  upon dissenters is to give the same licence to all others who have, but
fear to lose, power.  The judgment that the risks of suppression  are  greater
than  the  harm  done by bad ideas rests upon faith in the ultimate good sense
and decency of free people.
45.  The problem of defining the area of freedom of expression when it appears
to conflict with the various social interests enumerated under
Article  19(2)
may briefly  be  touched upon here.  There does indeed have to be a compromise
between the interest of freedom of expression and special interests.   But  we
cannot simply  balance  the two interests as if they are of equal weight.  Our
commitment of freedom of expression  demands  that  it  cannot  be  suppressed
unless  the  situations  created  by allowing the freedom are pressing and the
community interest is endangered.    The  anticipated  danger  should  not  be
remote, conjectural or far-fetched.  It should have proximate and direct nexus
with the  expression.    The  expression  of  thought  should be intrinsically
dangerous to the public interest.  In other words, the  expression  should  be
inseparably  locked  up  with the action contemplated like the equivalent of a
spark in a power keg.
28.  The right to publish and the freedom of  press  as  enshrined  in
Article 19(1)(a)
of  the  Constitution  of  India  are  sacrosanct.  The only
parameters of restriction are provided in
Article 19(2)
of  the  Constitution.
As observed by Mudholkar,  J.    in
Sakal Papers (P) Ltd.  Vs.  Union of India
(AIR 1962 SC 305) the courts must be ever vigilant in  guarding  perhaps  this
most precious  of all the freedoms guaranteed by our Constitution.  The reason
for this is obvious.  The freedom of speech and expression of  opinion  is  of
paramount  importance  under a democratic constitution which envisages changes 
in the composition of legislatures and governments and must be preserved.  The
interim order granted by the learned single Judge  is  a  blanket  injunction.
The order  virtually  amounts  to  a  gag  order or censorship of press.  Such
censorship  cannot  be  countenanced  in  the  scheme  of  our  constitutional
framework.  Even assuming that the articles published by the appellants amount
to  character  assassination of the respondents, there is no justification for
granting a blanket injunction restraining the appellants from  publishing  any
articles, in  future.    It  would  not  be  appropriate for us to examine the
articles at this stage on the touchstone of defamation, but what we do observe
is that they are not of such a nature warranting a restraint order, especially
when the appellants are willing to face the consequences in a  trial  in  case
the same are held to be defamatory, and the plea of the appellants of truth is
yet to be analysed by the Court.
29.   The  fundamental right of freedom of speech is involved in these
proceedings and not merely the right of liberty of the press.  If this  action
can  be  maintained  against  a  newspaper, it can be maintained against every
private citizen who ventures to criticise the ministers  who  are  temporarily
conducting the  affairs of the government.  In a free democratic society those
who  hold  office  in  government  and  who   are   responsible   for   public
administration must  always  be  open  to criticism.  Any attempt to stifle or
fetter such criticism amounts to political censorship of  the  most  insidious
and objectionable  kind.    As  observed  in  Kartar  Singhs Case (supra) the
persons holding public offices must not be thin-skinned with reference to  the
comments  made  on  them  and  even  where they know that the observations are 
undeserved and unjust, they must bear with them and submit to be misunderstood 
for a time.  At times public figures have  to  ignore  vulgar  criticisms  and
abuses  hurled  against  them  and  they  must restrain themselves from giving
importance to the same by prosecuting the person responsible for the same.  In
the instant case, the respondents have already chosen  to  claim  damages  and
their claim  is  yet  to  be  adjudicated  upon.  They will have remedy if the
statements are held to be defamatory  or  false  and  actuated  by  malice  or
personal animosity.
30.   As  observed  in R.Rajagopals Case (supra) the right to privacy
has two aspects which are but two faces of the same coin.  First  the  general
law  of  privacy  which  offers  a  tort  action for damages resulting from an
unlawful invasion of privacy  and  secondly,  the  constitutional  recognition
given to the right to privacy which protects personal privacy against unlawful
government invasion.    Though  the right to privacy can be characterized as a
fundamental right, as held in R.  Rajagopals  Case  it  is  not  an  absolute
right.  In Time,  Inc Vs.  Hill (385 U.  S.374) it was pointed out that in the
case of public officials, insofar as their official function is involved, they
are substantially without a right to privacy and  factual  error  and  content
defamatory  of  official reputation or both, are insufficient for the award of
damages for false  statements  unless  actual  malice    knowledge  that  the
statements are false or reckless disregard of the truth is alleged and proved.
In a democratic set up a close and microscopic examination of private lives of
public men  is  the natural consequence of holding of public offices.  What is
good for a private citizen who does not come within the public gaze may not be
true of a person holding public office.  What a person holding  public  office
does  within  the  four  walls  of his house does not totally remain a private
matter.  We agree with Mr.Jothi that the scrutiny of public figures  by  media
should  not  also  reach  a stage where it amounts to harassment to the public
figures and their family members and they must be permitted to live  and  lead
their life in peace.  But the public gaze cannot be avoided which is necessary
corollary of their holding public offices.
31.   We  are  also  unable  to  accept the submission advanced by Mr.
Jothi that the appellants should be asked to seek prior verification from  the
respondents  before publishing any articles and publish the denial, if any, of
the respondents.  According to Mr.Jothi rule of  prior  verification  is  laid
down in  R.Rajagopals Case (supra).  We are afraid that the submission of the
learned counsel is based on total misinterpretation of the observations of the
Supreme Court.    The  Supreme  Court  has  not  laid  down  that  the   prior
verification of  the  facts  is  must in all such cases.  All that the Supreme
Court indicated is that the proof that the member of the press or media  acted
after a reasonable verification of the facts would be sufficient.  However, at
the  same  time, it must be noted that the Supreme Court in R.Rajagopals Case
has clearly held that a citizen has a right to safeguard the  privacy  of  his
own,   his  family,  marriage,  procreation,  motherhood,  child  bearing  and
education, among other matters, and none can publish anything in reference  to
the  above  matters  without  his/her consent  whether laudatory or critical.
Therefore, if an article is purely relating to the personal life of  a  public
official,  it  would  be  necessary  for  the  member of the press or media to
publish such article only after a reasonable verification of the facts.    The
position  may, however, be different if a person voluntarily thrust himself or
herself into a controversy or voluntarily invites or raises a controversy.  In
the circumstances, we direct the appellants  that  whenever  they  propose  to
publish any article purely concerning personal life of the first respondent or
the  second  respondent  or  both,  the appellants shall forward their queries
and/or the gist of the proposed article, as the case may be, to the fax number
furnished by the learned counsel appearing for the  respondents.    The  first
respondent or the second respondent or both, as the case may be, shall respond
to  the queries of the appellants in relation to their proposed article to the
fax number of the appellants.  However, if there is no response to the queries
either from the first respondent or the second respondent within 36 hours from
receiving such queries, the appellants will be entitled to proceed to  publish
the proposed  article in their bi-weekly.  It is true that the press cannot be
compelled to also publish the version of the official, about whom the  article
is written,  with  reference  to  the  article published against him/her.  We,
however, feel that it is expected of any responsible member of  the  press  to
also indicate the version of the official concerned in their proposed article.
32.   With  the  above observations, we vacate the order of injunction
passed by the learned single Judge.  The O.S.A.  is  accordingly  disposed  of
with no order as to costs.  Consequently, C.M.P.No.4534 of 2006 is closed.
ab/sm/pv 
