SOURCE: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/12699493/
SCRAPED: 2026-02-18T10:25:43.934348
TITLE: Full Document
================================================================================

[Cites
28
, Cited by
0
]
Delhi District Court
Sc No. 25/99, Fir No. 17/99 1 State vs Sanjeev Nanda Etc. on 2 September, 2008
SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       1                   State Vs Sanjeev Nanda etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




                  THE COURT OF SH. VINOD KUMAR
               ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE, NEW DELHI

Sessions Case No. 25/99
FIR No. 17/99
PS Lodhi Colony
U/s 304/201
IPC
State Vs 1.    Sanjeev Nanda
               S/o Sh. Suresh Nanda
               R/o D­108 Defence Colony, New Delhi.
          2.   Manik Kapoor
               S/o Sh. Sudhir Kapoor
               R/o 7 Birbal Road Bijang Pura Extn.
               New Delhi.
          3.   Bhola Nath
               S/o Sh. Moti Lal
               R/o 103, Sunder Nagar, New Delhi.
          4.   Shyam Singh Rana
               S/o Sh. Nandan Singh Rana
               R/o 50 Golf Link, New Delhi.
          5.   Rajeev Gupta
               S/o Sh. Ved Parkash Gupta
               R/o 50 Golf Link, New Delhi.

Date of institution : 24.4.1999
Date of concluding the final arguments : 26.8.2008
Date of judgement : 2.9.2008

JUDGEMENT
In the early hours of 10.1.99 one vehicle crashed into a few
persons on the road  and  killed six of them.   One surviver (i.e
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       2
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




PW2 Manoj Malik) states that the offending vehicle was a truck.
Prosecution alleges, it was a BMW car.   The prosecution alleges
that the offending vehicle  was being driven by accused Sanjeev
Nanda.  Defence  vehemently denies it.    Prosecution alleges it is
an offence U/S 304 (1)
IPC
.  Ld defence counsels argue that at
the most it is a case of  304­A
IPC
.  One witness says that he saw
the   entire   incident   but   defence   asserts   he   was   never   there.
Prosecution alleges that some of the accused persons washed the
offending vehicle to destroy the evidence, whereas defence pleads
false implications.
These are the main questions which require determination
by this court but this trial poses greater questions as to what is
the meaning of fair trial and how should the court proceed when
the witnesses are being won over and the trial is being hijacked
by the high and mighty.  The trial saw many dramatic twists and
turns and it is an eloquent witness to a common state of affairs in
the criminal trials.  Of course all the trials do not get the publicity
as the present one.   This is a case where it is needed that the
entire criminal justice system should sit up to find effective ways
and means to tackle a situation where wealthy and highly placed
persons   are   able   to   thwart   the   entire   course   of   justice   and
thereafter at the end, claim benefit of doubt as a matter of right.
This   is   a   trial   in   which   entire   criminal   justice   system
crumbled, though a hope for justice still remained because of the
watchful eyes of vigilant fourth estate.
THE PROSECUTION CASE

    The   prosecution   alleges   that   one   BMW   car   number
M­312LYP was purchased in the name of Ms Sonali Nanda and
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       3
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




the same had recently reached at the residence of  its owner.  The
same was yet to be registered with the Transport Authorities in
India.   It is alleged that accused Sanjeev Nanda, the brother of
Sonali Nanda drove this vehicle from her residence and  attended
a party at some friend's house where he got badly drunk.   After
attending   this   party,   he   drove   back   the   car   at   about   4   am   on
10.1.99.   Accused Manik Kapur and one Sidharth Gupta (since
discharged) were also sitting in the said car.
It is alleged that Manoj Malik (PW2) started from his house
to leave his friends namely Nasir, Mehendi Hasan and his friend
Gulab at Nizamudin railway station on foot.  When they reached
at   about   4.30   am   near   petrol   pump,   Lodhi   Road,   three   police
officials namely constable Rajan (CRPF), constable Ramraj and
constable   Peru   Lal  both   of   Delhi   Home   Guard   who   were   on
checking duty stopped these persons and started checking them.
In the meantime a BMW car having no. M­312LYP being driven
by accused Sanjeev Nanda came at an extremely high speed and
hit the above stated seven persons.  It is alleged that on being hit,
those persons flew in the air and fell on the bonnet and the wind
screen of the car and some of them rolled down and came under
the   bonnet   of   the   car.     The   car   took   a   right   turn   and   hit   the
central   verge.     The   persons   who   came   under   the   car   were
dragged up to that point.  Manoj  who had fallen on the bonnet
fell at some distance.  The car stopped there and accused Sanjeev
who was driving the vehicle came out from the car.  It is alleged
that   accused   Manik   Kapur,   who   was   travelling   in   the   said   car
with accused Sanjeev Nanda told him to rush.  Accused Sanjeev
Nanda saw beneath the bonnet of the car.   The injured persons
were shouting and crying but ignoring the injured persons who
had stuck under the bonnet of the car, accused Sanjeev Nanda
drove away the car at a high speed towards Dayal Singh College.
SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       4
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




It   is   alleged     that   the   persons   who   had   been   injured   and   the
persons, who had come underneath the car, were crying.  Despite
this fact accused Sanjeev Nanda drove away the car and in this
process, the three persons who were entangled under the bonnet
of the car were dragged, crushed and fell one by one on the road.
It is alleged that accused Sanjeev Nanda parked this vehicle in
the house of Sidharth Gupta   ie 50, Golf Links and his father ie
accused   Rajeev   Gupta   with   the   help   of   his   servants   namely
accused Shyam Singh and accused Bhola Nath washed  the car
and destroyed the material evidence.
Prosecution alleges that the PW1 Harishanker, an Attendant
on the petrol pump saw the incident of black BMW car hitting the
people.     He   immediately   informed   telephonically   Sh.   Brijesh
Virmani  (PW17)  his employer/the Manager of Car Care Center,
Lodhi Road, who in turn informed the PCR at no.100 who in turn
flashed the message to concerned local police.  The police station
Lodhi   Colony   received   this   information   and   the   same   was
recorded as DD no. 27­A.  Pursuant to this information, SI Kailash
Chand reached at the spot.  Till then a few PCR vans had already
reached there.   First of all,   ASI   Devender Singh  (PW36)  the
Incharge of Eagle 11   PCR   reached at the spot and   took away
injured   Manoj   Malik   to   the   hospital.     He   also   flashed   the
messages to other PCRs who  reached there.  The other PCR vans
took the remaining injured or deceased persons to the hospital.
Inspector Jagdish  Pandey (PW13)  the incharge of south district
PCR Van also reached at the spot and flashed   message to call
SHO.
SI Kailash Chand  (PW58)  wrote a rukka in which he had
described the scene of crime.   As per this description he found
three persons namely constable Ramraj, constable Rajan and one
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       5
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




more person dead and he came to know that four other injured
persons   have   been   taken   away   by   the   PCR   in   the   hospital.   SI
Kailash Chand found one broken number plate and when it was
assembled, it was found to be M­312­LYP and on it  Park Lane
and BMW was written.  One black colour piece of Bumper and
rear view mirror glass of a vehicle were found scattered up to
100­125  feet.   Head of one person was found crushed.    There
were   skid   marks   of   a   vehicle   on   the   spot.     The   body   of   one
constable namely Ram Raj was found crushed and his right leg
was found at a distance of 10 - 15 feet away.   The belly of Ct.
Rajan Kumar was also found burst and the blood was flowing on
the road for quite some distance.  All the three dead bodies were
sent to AIIMS hospital by ambulance.  Therefore, it was clear to
SI Kailash Chand that the offending vehicle was a black colour
BMW   car   having   a   number   plate   bearing   no.   M­312­LYP.
Considering the scene of crime, he recommended  registration of
FIR U/S 338/304
IPC
.   The rukka was despatched to the police
station where the FIR EXPW18/A was registered.
Prosecution alleges that when SI   Jagdish  Pandey (PW13)
Incharge of the PCR reached at the spot, he found a trail of oil on
the road starting from the place of offence.  He followed the trail
and reached  50 Golf  Links.  SHO Vimlesh Yadav also reached at
the spot.    The gate of this house was closed. When the police
officials  peeped through the side  hinge of the gate, they found
that accused Rajeev Gupta, Bhola Nath and Shyam Singh were
washing   a   damaged   black   BMW   car.   The   police   got   the   gate
opened.
It is alleged that this car was not having a number plate
and its broken bumper and lights appeared to be similar to the
broken   bumper   and   light   pieces   found   at   the   spot   near   petrol
pump.   One park lane sticker was also affixed on this car.   The
blood was also noticed in the rear left side wheel of the car. On
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       6
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




query by the police, Rajeev Gupta told that the car belonged to
Sanjeev Nanda who was a friend of his son Sidharth Gupta and
that they had gone to Defence Colony at the residence of Sanjeev
Nanda.   SI Ulhas Giri was sent to the house of accused Sanjeev
Nanda   at   Defence   Colony   and   he   brought   accused   Sanjeev
Nanda, and Manik Kapur and Sidharth Gupta to 50 Golf Links.
As   soon   as   all   the   three   accused   persons   reached   at   the   spot,
accused  Sanjeev Nanda asked accused  Rajeev  Gupta '' Kya car
Dhul   Gai   ?''.     Police   apprehended     all   the   accused   persons
including   Sidharth   Gupta   and   sent   them   for   their   medical
examination.     It   is   alleged   that   at   that   time   the   Investigating
Officer observed an injury on the lip of accused Sanjeev Nanda.
All the accused were medically examined.   As per     the
MLC of accused Sanjeev Nanda, prepared by Dr. T. Milo of AIIMS
Hospital, Sanjeev Nanda was brought to casualty of AIIMS by
HC Nand Kishore with alleged history of consuming alcohol.
The pupils of his eyes were bilaterally dilated.  The speech of
coherent  and  gait unsteady.   Smell of alcohol was present.
There was blood clot in left nostril.   He complained pain in
the nose and lips and following injuries were observed:
1. One   lacerated   wound   in
                       the   upper   lip   .2   x   .5   cm.
Size   with   swelling   and
                       blood clot.
2. One   lacerated   wound   in
                       the   lower   lip   .1   x   .6   cm.
With swelling and showing
                       blood clot.
The blood sample of accused Sanjeev Nanda was taken by
the doctor which was sent to FSL.   On receiving this sample on
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       7
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




12.1.1999, doctor Madhulika Sharma  (PW16),  Senior Scientific
Officer cum Chemical Examiner  found on testing the same that
the   blood   sample   gave   positive   test   for   presence   of  0.115   %
weight/volume ethyle alcohol.  Her report is Ex.PW16/A which is
dated 15.1.99.
At about 10 am on 10.1.1999, police called Nagesh Kumar
Wadera  (PW29)  a   Finger   Print   Expert   who   lifted   the   Finger
Prints from the various parts of the car at 50 Golf Links itself.
The car was later on taken to the police station Lodhi Colony.  On
11.1.99   Senior   Scientific   Officer   D.S  Chakoutra  (PW31)  was
called at the police station and he inspected the car again.   He
lifted some blood lying on the steering  of the vehicle.  As per the
report of Sh. D.S. Chakotra, this blood stain was of "B" group.
I may add here that the another blood sample of Sanjeev
Nanda taken at AIIMS hospital was sent for chemical examination
but no opinion could be given regarding  the blood group because
as per report  Ex.PW31/E  the blood was found putrefied.   It is
pertinent to note that this blood sample was received by FSL on
3.4.99   i.e.  after  about  three  months   of  the   incident.    Later  on
during trial, accused Sanjeev Nanda filed his own blood group
report and as per this report , his blood group is B positive.
On   10.1.99   SI   Kailash   Chand   prepared   a   site   plan
EXPW58/B.   This site plan mentions the scene of crime in great
details.     On   23.3.99,   on   the   instructions   of   SI   Kailash   Chand,
rough notes of the spot were prepared by SI Madan Pal (PW19),
a draftsman and on the basis of these rough notes, he prepared a
scaled site plan Ex.PW19/A.  
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       8
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




      Mechanical   inspection   of   the   vehicle   was   got   conducted
and   as   per   the   mechanical   inspection   report  Ex.PW14/B
prepared   by   Devinder   Singh,   the  steering   oil   was   found
finished in oil reserve.  The report mentions the damage on the
car in detail.
The postmortem of the dead bodies was got conducted.
On 11.1.99 the police produced accused Sanjeev Nanda and
other accused persons before Sh. V. K. Sharma, Ld. Metropolitan
Magistrate   and   sought   two   days   police   remand.     On   police
remand,   accused   Sanjeev   Nanda   got   recovered   his   woolen
sweater and a jeans (both of which were blood stains) from his
house  D108,   Defence   Colony,   New  Delhi.     It   is  alleged   by  the
prosecution   that   accused   Sanjeev   Nanda   was   wearing   these
clothes at the time of the offence.  Both these clothes were seized
vide memo Ex.PW32/A.  

     On   15.1.99,   Sunil   Kulkarni   (examined   as   court   witness)
appeared as a witness of accident.  The Test Identification Parade
was arranged for 18.1.99 but accused Sanjeev Nanda refused to
take part in the same.  On 21.1.99, a statement of Sunil Kulkarni
was   recorded   by   Sh.   Raj   Kumar   Chauhan,   the   then   Ld.
Metropolitan Magistrate under
Section 164
CrPC.
After completion of investigation, charge sheet was filed.
THE CHARGE

       On   these   accusations,   charges   were   framed   on   3.8.99
against the accused persons.   Charge under
Section 201
/
34
IPC
was   framed   against   accused   Sanjeev   Nanda,   Manik   Kapur   and
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       9
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




Sidharth Gupta for running away from the spot with intention to
screen themselves from legal punishment.
Another   charge   under   Section   201/34   IPC   was   framed
against   accused   Rajeev   Gupta,   Shyam   Singh   Rana   and   Bhola
Nath for causing certain evidence of the offence to disappear
by washing the car to remove blood stains from it.
Another   charge   under
Section   304(I)
/
308
/
35
IPC   was
framed   against   accused   Sidharth   Gupta.    However   he   was
discharged by Hon'ble High Court later on.
Another   charge   under
Section   304(I)
/
308
/
34
IPC   was
framed   against   accused   Sanjeev   Nanda   and   Manik   Kapur   for
causing the deaths of Rajan Kumar, Peru Lal, Ram Raj, Mehandi
Hasan, Nasir and Gulab and for attempting to commit culpable
homicide not amounting to murder of Manoj Malik.
All the accused persons pleaded not guilty and claimed trial.
PROSECUTION WITNESSES

            In   order   to   prove   its   case   prosecution   examined   as
many as 61 witnesses.
PW1  Hari  Shanker   Yadav  is   an   employee   of  Petrol
Pump known as Car Care Center at Lodhi Road, New Delhi. He
testified that one vehicle came at a fast speed from the side of
Nizamuddin.     In   the   accident   some   persons   had   fallen   down,
received   injuries   and   also   died.     He   testified   that   he   was   so
frightened that he went inside the petrol pump.   In respect of
other details, the witness did not support the prosecution case.
PW2   Manoj   Malik  is   the   injured   witness.
In   the
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       10
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008
month of January 1999 he was staying at CGO Complex, Lodhi
Road and was working there at the Dhaba of Kailash Chand.  He
testified that he was going towards the Railway Station with his
two friends.  They were stopped by the police.  He testified that
they were standing in the center of the road and one  truck  hit
them.  Due to this reason the three police officials and two of his
friends   were   killed   and   he   himself   was   injured.     In   cross
examination   he   testified   that   he   was   told   by   one   member   of
Parliament   in   Orisa   that   he   should   go   to   Delhi   and   contact
advocate Mr. Manoj and Ms Santosh Mishra.   This witness did
not support the prosecution case but in his cross examination by
Sh. R. K. Anand, adv. for accused Sanjeev Nanda, he testified that
after   two   or   four   minutes   the   truck   stopped   at   a   little
distance.
PW3 Ct. Sunil Kumar  was posted as constable at PS
Lodhi Colony on 10.1.99.  He had taken accused Sidharth Gupta
to AIIMS for his medical examination and collected the medical
papers from the hospital.
PW4   Ct.   Vikram   Singh  took   accused   Shyam   Singh
Rana for his medical examination at AIIMS.
PW5 Ct. Banwari Lal  was sent to AIIMS along with
accused Bhola Nath for his medical examination.
PW6 Dr. S. K. Gupta  conducted postmortem on the
dead body of Mehandi Hasan S/o Abdul Jafar 20 years male.  He
found the abrasions and lacerated wounds and opined the cause
of  death   to   be  an  anti   mortem  head   injury  produced   by  blunt
force.
PW7 Suresh  had gone to the mortuary of AIIMS on
11.1.99, where he identified the dead body of his brother in law
Peru Lal S/o Ghasi Ram.
PW8 Abdul Jabbar  is the father of deceased Mehndi
Hasan.   He had  gone to the mortuary of AIIMS  on 17.1.99  to
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       11
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




identify the dead body of his son Mehendi Hasan.
PW9 Sunil was working as a mechanic at Dalip Motors
Workshop   at   Mehar   Chand   Market,   Lodhi   Colony   in   January
1999. On the asking of the police, he opened the damaged head
light of left side of BMW car.  The same was seized by the police
vide memo Ex.PW9/A.
             PW10 Dr. T. Milo medically examined Accused Manik
Kapur.   Report in this regard is  Ex.PW10/A.   He also examined
accused Bhola Nath.  Report in this regard is Ex.PW10/D.  Dr. T
Milo also examined accused Rajeev Gupta.  Report is Ex.PW10/F.
On 10.1.99 he had also examined accused Sanjeev Nanda vide
MLC Ex.PW10/G.
             PW11 ASI Ram Avadh  was on duty on PCR Van DL­
IV­3582 on the night intervening 9/10.1.99.  On 10.1.99 at about
4:15   am     he   received   an   information     from   Eagle   ­1   and   he
alongwith Inspector Jagdish Pandey reached in the Gypsy at the
place of offence.  He also accompanied Inspector Jagdish Pandey
to 50, Golf Links.
PW12 Ct. Jamshed Ali had gone to house No. 50 Golf
Links on 10.1.99 along with SI Bega Ram, HC Nand Kishore, Ct.
Sunil   Kumar,   Ct.   Vikram,   Ct.   Banwari   and   Ct.   Inder   Mal   and
assisted the  investigation.
PW13 Inspector  Jagdish  Pandey  was on duty from
8:00  pm to  8:00   AM as Checking  Oficer,   South  Zone,  PCR  on
Police   Gypsy   No.   DL   1   V   3582   along   with   the   staff   ASI   Ram
Avadh,   Ct.   Gunman   Sunder   Pal   and   Ct.   Driver   Sham   Singh
reached at the spot.  He followed an oil trail and reached at 50,
Golf Link where he found accused Rajeev Gupta, Shyam Singh
and Bhola Nath  washing the BMW car.
PW14 Sh. Davinder Singh inspected the BMW car on
6.2.99 at Lodhi Colony, Police Station and after examination he
gave his report Ex.PW14/B.
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       12
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




              PW15 Sh. S. C. Gupta  is the  Director and Incharge
Meteorological Office, Safdarjung Airport, New Delhi.   He gave
the   weather   report  Ex.PW15/B  of   10.1.99   at   5:30   am.     He
testified that   SI  Kailash Chand moved an application on 10.1.99
at about 4.50 p.m to give the weather report.  As per his report,
the   visibility   on   10.1.99   at   5.30   am   was    1000   metres   at
Safdarjung Airport.
PW16   Dr.   Madhulika   Sharm  is   Senior   Scientific
Officer  cum  Ex officio  Chemical Examiner, FSL  Malviya Nagar,
New Delhi. She proved her report Ex.PW16/A. As per this report,
the blood sample of Sanjeev Nanda gave  positive  test for ethyl
alchohol and was found to contain  0.115 % weight/volume.
PW17 Sh. Brijesh Virmani is the Manager of Car Care
Center, Petrol Pump, Lodhi Road.  On 10.1.99 at about 4.40 am,
he   received   a   telephonic   call   from   Harishanker,   the   telephone
attendant   who   informed   that   some   serious   accident   has   taken
place in front of   the Petrol Pump.   This witness informed the
Police Control Room at telephone No. 100.
PW18 HC Surat Singh was posted at PS Lodhi Colony
as Duty Officer from 12 mid night to 8:00 am in the morning of
10.1.99.   On receipt of rukka at 7.20 am ,   he recorded FIRNo.
17/99 EXPW18/A.
              PW19 SI Madan Pal is the Draughtsman.  On 23.3.99
on the instructions of SI Kailash Chand he visited the place of
incident.  He made rough notes at the spot and then on 24.3.99
he prepared scaled site plan Ex.PW19/A at the place of incident.
PW20   Rajesh   Kumar  is   the   Director   of   M/s   R.   U.
Import Export Private Ltd.  He handed over to SI Kailash all the
relvant documents of the BMW car on 14.1.99.  The documents,
which were handed over to the police, were regarding the custom
clearance of the BMW Car.  He testified that  BMW car No. M­312
LYP was cleared in the name of Sonali Nanda, R/o 4, Prithviraj
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       13
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




Road, New Delhi.
PW21 SI R. D. Pandey  took a pulanda and a sample
seal of CMO AIIMS on 12.1.99 and deposited the same at FSL
Malviya Nagar vide RC No. 203/21.
PW22 Ct. Prithvi Raj was deputed to guard the dead
body   of   Mehendi   Hassan   at   Mortuary   AIIMS   Hospital   from
16.1.99 to 17.1.99.   He also received the blood samples of the
deceased   from   the   hospital   and   the   clothes   of   the   deceased
which were taken in possession by Head Constable Vijay Pal vide
memo  EXPW22/B. 
             PW23   Ct.   Inder   Mal  along   with   SI   Mega   Ram   had
taken   the   accused   Rajeev   Gupta   for   medical   examination   on
10.1.99.
PW24   Ct.   Manohar   Lal  was   on   duty   on   PCR   Van
which took injured  Manoj to Hospital.
PW25   Bajinder   Singh  was   working   as   a   Security
Guard in Group Force Company in the month of January 1999.
On   9.1.99   he   was   on   duty   as   Security   Guard   at   Kothi   No   4,
Prithviraj Road.     He brought a register maintained   at the said
residence for entry and exit of the cars.  He   testified that as per
this register,  the BMW Car No.  M­312 LYP was taken out from
the Kothi at 18.55 hours by one 'Baba'.    He did not support the
prosecution   case   that   accused   Sanjeev   Nanda       is   also   called
Baba.
PW26 Sh. Ram Deva identified the dead body of one
Peru Lal S/o Ghasi Ram.
PW27 Rajinder Singh identified the dead body of his
nephew Ram Raj S/o Rajpal.
PW28 Rajinder Keshav  carried out the inspection of
the car registration no. M 3 12 LYP and gave report in this regard
Ex.PW28/A.   This witness found that    steering and brakes of
the car were OK.
SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       14
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008
PW29 Sh. Nagesh  Kumar   Wadera  was  posted   as  a
Finger Print Expert in Southern Wing Crime Team, R. K. Puram
on 10.1.99.  He noticed and developed 18 chance prints with the
help of gray developing powder and prepared report Ex.PW29/A
to this effect.
PW30 HC Rajpal had gone to mortuary on 11.1.99 of
AIIMS along with HC Vijay Pal on the instruction of I.O.  He is a
witness to handing over the dead bodies to  their relatives.
PW31 Mr. D. S. Chakoutra  inspected a BMW car on
11.1.99 in the police station.   He lifted     blood stains from the
steering of the car.    On examination, this blood was found to be
of B group. However, its Rh factor could not be identified.
PW32 HC Jagbir Singh on 11.1.99 along with Kailash
Chand SI,   SI Ulhas Giri and accused Sanjeev Nanda visited the
house D­108, Defence Colony, New Delhi and he is a witness to
the   recovery   of     blood   stained   Jeans   and   Jersey/Sweater   of
accused Sanjeev Nanda from house No D­108, Defence Colony.
PW33 SI Bega Ram along with Ct. Nand Kishore, Ct.
Sunil, Ct. Vikram, Ct. Inder Mal, Ct. Jamshed, Ct. Banwari got
medically   examined   accused   Sanjeev   Nanda,   Sidharth,   Manik,
Sham Singh, Bhola Nath and Rajeev Gupta in AIIMS Hospital.
PW34 Ct. Sadhi Ram was a gun man on PCR vehicle
no. Eagle 11 on 11.1.99.  ASI Davinder was the incharge of that
PCR Gypsy and driver Ct. Manohar lal was also with him.  They
reached at the place of offence and  picked up injured Manoj to
hospital.
PW35 Surinder  had identified  the dead  body of his
elder brother Ram Raj on 11.1.99 in the mortuary of AIIMS.
PW36 ASI Davinder Singh along with HC Sadhi Ram,
Gunman and the driver Manohar Lal were on the patrolling duty
in East Nizamuddin Area in the PCR Gypsy.  He reached  the spot
on receiving a wireless message about an accident and took away
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       15
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




the injured Manoj to AIIMS hospital.
PW37 Ct. Jagan Lal  on receiving of DD No. 27A he
along with Kailash Chand SI reached in front of petrol Pump Car
Care Center at Lodhi Road.  He also took the rukka prepared by
SI   Kailash   Chand   to   police   station   and   after   getting   the   FIR
registered, came back to the spot.
PW38   C   SI   Vidya   Nand    was   on   duty   on   a   PCR
Vehicle, No. 14 and  on  receiving a message from Control Room
about  one  accident   at  Lodhi   Road  in  front  of  Car  Care  Center
Petrol   Pump,   he   reached   at   the   spot   and   took   one   injured
Mehendi Hasan to hospital in PCR Van.    This injured later on
expired in the hospital.
PW39 ASI Sawai Lal  along with Ct. Amar Singh and
Ct. Rakesh Kumar driver on 9/10.1.99 were on patrolling duty in
PCR vehicle Eagle ­13.   On receiving the   message at 4:53 AM
about  some  accident  in  front  of  Car  Care  Center  petrol  Pump,
Lodhi Road, he reached at the spot.
PW40   HC   Nand   Kishore  was   posted   as   Head
Constable on 10.1.99  at PS  Lodhi Colony. At about 5.15 am he
reached in front of Car Care Centre Petrol Pump.  He found that
one of the dead bodies was of constable Rambhaj, another dead
body was of CRPF constable Rajan.    He is a witness to various
memos prepared by SI  Kailash at the spot.  He also reached  at
50, Golf Links and found that the car had been recently washed.
PW41   Ct.   Girish   Kumar  was   posted   at   AIIMS   on
10.1.99 as Duty Constable.  He handed over the blood sample of
Sanjeev Nanda and sample seal to SI Bega Ram who seized the
same vide memo Ex.PW41/A.
             PW42 Ms Alka was working as a Receptionist in Hotel
Shiva Continental in which witness Sunil Kulkarni was alloted a
Room No. 102 on 8.1.99.  She proved  a received of advance of
Rs 1000/­ paid by Sunil Kulkarni as   EXPW42/A .   She testified
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       16
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




that as per  the record/register  EXPW42/B maintained by them,
Sunil Kulkarni left the  hotel at  12.30 pm on 9.1.99.
PW43 ASI Dhian Singh    was on duty on a  PCR  Van,
Victor  ­22  at  the time of offence  and he    along with  his staff
reached   at   the   spot   in   the   PCR   Van.     He   removed   one   of   the
injured whose name was revealed as Peru Lal to AIIMS.
PW44 HC Vijaypal Singh is the Malkhana Mohrar. 
             PW45 Ct. Darhinder was posted as Duty Constable at
AIIMS on 9/10.1.99.
PW46 F. C. Chauhan DSP identified the dead body of
Ct.   Rajan   Kumar  and   signed   the   documents   which   is
Ex.PW46/A.
             PW47   SI   Sada   Vriksh   Yadav  got   the   postmortem
done   on   11.1.99   in   respect   of   dead   body   of   Peru   Lal,Gulab,
Rajan, Ram Raj , Nasir and Mehendi Hasan.
PW48 Sh. Mohd. Samsher identified the dead body of
Mohd. Nasir in mortuary of AIIMS.
PW49 Dr. Sunil Kumar conducted the postmortem on
11.1.99 on Mohd. Nasir 30 years male.
PW50 Meer Shamsher identified the dead body of his
nephew Nasir Mohd  and  Mohd Gulab.
PW51 Om Bir Singh  was on duty  at PCR vehicle No.
Eagle 16.   He   picked up   Nasir S/o Abdul Shakur, who was in
injured condition and took him to AIIMS hospital and got him
admitted vide MLC No. 2482/99 through constable on duty.
PW52 Sh. A. K. Jain is the Development Officer/AAO,
National   Insurance   Co.   Ltd.   34,   Kapashera,   New   Delhi.   He
testified that he had  insured the BMW car in question.
PW53   Bannu   Singh      is   a   Sub   Inspector   in   86th
Battalion of CRPF.  He testified that  their soldiers ( Sipahi) used
to be deputed in various police stations for   duty and constable
Rajan Kumar was posted in  Lodhi Colony near Care Car Centre
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       17
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




on   the   said   date.     He   identified   the   dead   body   of   Ct.   Rajan
Kumar.
PW54 Kirti Ram Unyal brought the summoned record
including   MLC   No.   2740    EXPX  of   Rajeev   Gupta   from   AIIMS
Hospital.
PW55 Inspector Vimlesh Yadav  was posted as SHO
PS Lodhi Colony on 9.10.99.  She  reached at the spot alongwith
SI Kailash Chand and constable Jagan Lal.   She received a wire
less   message from Inspector  Jagdish   Pandey  who  reached  50,
Golf Links.  She noticed  that  the car was being washed.  She got
the gate of the house opened and found the  damaged  BMW car.
She directed SI  Kailash Chand to proceed with the investigation
and directed  SI Ulhas Giri to reach D­108, Defence Colony where
accused  Sanjeev  Nanda,   Manik   Kapur  and  Sidharth   Gupta  had
gone.     She   also   called   the   photographer   and   the   Crime   Team
and sent  all the accused persons  for medical examination.    The
vehicle was seized and sent to police station .  On 15.1.99, Sunil
Kulkarni appeared as  witness of accident.  She testfied that  TIP
was  got  arranged  but  accused   Sanjeev  Nanda  refused  to    take
part in TIP proceedings.  The statement U/.S 164
CrPC
of witness
Sunil Kulkarni was also got recorded.
PW56   Sh.   R.   K.   Chauhan  was   working   as
Metropolitan   Magistrate   on   21.1.99,   New   Delhi.     Sh.   R.   K.
Chauhan,   Ld.   Metropolitan   Magistrate   had   recorded   the
statement U/S 164
CrPC
of witness Sunil Laxman Kulkarni.  The
same is Ex.PW56/B.
              PW57   Ms   Renu   Bhatnagar  was   posted   as
Metropolitan Magistrate on 16.1.99 in Patiala House Courts.  On
18.1.99 she reached Tihar Jail at about 2:25 pm for conducting
the TIP of accused  Sanjeev Nanda.  Accused had refused to join
the TIP.
PW58   SI   Kailash   Chand  is   the   initial   Investigating
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       18
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




Officer.He prepared  the rukka , got FIR registered and  collected
the material evidence from the spot.
PW59 Ct. Ramavtar  was posted as photographer on
10.1.99 in South Distt. DCP Office.  On that day on receipt of the
information he took the photographs of the scene of occurrence
from   different   angles.     Negatives   of   which   are  Ex.PW59/1   to
59/18.  He had also prepared a video film at the spot.  The video
film covers the area from the place of accident to 50 Golf Links
where   the   accident   car   was   found   parked.     The   video   film   is
Ex.PW59/19.     During   trial,   the   video   was   converted   into   the
C.Dwhich are part of judicial file.
PW60   Ulas   Giri  is   the   second   Investigating   Officer.
Apart from other investigation, he also effected recovery of the
clothes  of Sanjeev Nanda at his instance.
PW61 Dr. Prashant Kulshreshtha is Senior Resident,
Forensic Medicines, AIIMS, New Delhi.  On 11.1.99 he performed
autopsy on body of deceased Rajan Kumar, Peeru Lal and Ram
Raj on the request of IO Sada Briksh PS Lodhi Colony.
Prosecution   witness   Sunil   Kulkarni   was   given   up   by   the
prosecution.  However, he was summoned  by me  U/S 311
CrPC
and   he   was   examined     as   a  court   witness  on   17.5.2007,
29.5.2007, 11.7.07 and 19.7.07.
STATEMENTS   UNDER   SECTION   313   CRPC   OF
ACCUSED PERSONS

            After completion of prosecution evidence, statements
of accused persons under
Section 313
CrPC were recorded.   All
the   accused   persons   except   accused   Manik   Kapur   preferred   to
lead evidence in their defence.
SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       19
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




DEFENCE WITNESSES
In   his   defence   evidence   accused   Sanjeev   Nanda
examined the following witnesses in his support:
DW1 Mrs Sumitra Nand  is grand mother of accused
Sanjeev Nanda. She testified that   she resides   at   House No. B
104, Defence Colony with her husband Admiral Nanda at B­104
Defence Colony.   Her son Suresh Nanda used to live abroad at
that time  but  he had a house at  4, Prithviraj Road, where  his
daughter Sonali Nanda used to live  alone and whenever Suresh
Nanda used to come to India, he would stay at 4, Prithviraj Road.
She testified that Smt Renu Nanda,   the wife of Suresh Nanda,
used to live separately with her son  ie accused Sanjeev Nanda at
D­108,   Defence   Colony.     She   testified   that     Renu   Nanda   and
Suresh   Nanda   used   to   live   separately   as   their   was   separation
between   them.     Sanjeev   Nanda   was   studying   abroad   but
whenever   he   came   to   India,   he   stayed   with   her   mother.    She
testified that at about 7.30 or 8 am on 10.1.99 Renu Nanda
called   her   and   her   husband   to   their   house   as   police   had
visited   her   house.         She     testified   that   after   she   and   her
husband   reached     D   108   Defence   Colony,   she   found     that
police   was   asking   Sanjeev   Nanda   to   accompany   them.
Sanjeev resisted and police officials gave two­ three blows on
his face due to which blood  oozed out from his lips.
DW2 Amit Kilambkar  is  cameraman India  TV,  202­
203­349 Business Point, Western Express Highway, Second Floor,
Andheri East, Mumbai.   He recorded the interview of one Gauri
Shanker   Tiwari   on   Sony   PD­170.     In   this   interview,   Gauri
Shanker Tiwari called     Sunil Kulkarni a Cheat and also stated
that   on   the   day   of   offence,   Sunil   Kulkarni   was   in   Mumbai.
However, Gaurishanker Tiwari was not examined by defence.
DW3 Sayedain Zaidi   is a Chief of Bureau (Mumbai)
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       20
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




India TV.  He interviewed Gauri Shanker Tiwari at his office or in
his studio in Mumbai.
DW4 Sh. V. N. Sehgal  is a retired   Director of CFSL,
CBI with a lot of experience.  He testified on various  aspects of
blood testing.  He testified about the effect of the alchohol upon a
person.   He also gave  his opinion on the rate of elimination of
ethenol from the blood.
Accused   Rajeev   Gupta,   Shyam   Singh   and   Bhola   Nath
examined following witnesses in their defence:
DW5   Gaurav   Karan  is   the   friend   of   Sh.   Sidharth
Gupta (the son of accused Rajeev Gupta).   He deposed that on
the   morning   of   10th  January   1999,   his   friend   Sidharth   Gupta
telephoned him  at about  7:30 - 8:00 in the morning that there
was  an accident  and requested him to reach at his house .  He
testified that when he reached at that house,   he found Sudhir
Sareen, the father in law of Sidharth Gupta at their house and
police   took   him  to   police   station.     He  testified   that  Mr  Rajeev
Gupta was not there at that point of time and  he came to know
that he is sleeping.    DW5 went up to the room of Rajeev Gupta
and knocked the door.       Rajeev Gupta and his wife opened the
door at about 9 am and then he  told them about the accident.  In
cross   examination,   he   admitted     that   he   was       son   of     an   Ex
Commissioner of Police.
DW6   Himalyani   Gupta  is   the   friend   and   lawyer   of
accused Rajeev Gupta.   She deposed that on 10th  January 1999
Rajeev Gupta gave her a call at around 10:00 am and was  asking
her   if   I   could   come   to   Lodhi   Colony   police   station   as   he   was
proceeding towards the police station.  She testified that she was
a  lawyer  and  a family friend   of Rajeev Gupta.     Therefore,  she
reached at the police station at about 10.45 am.
DW7 Karan Singh  is the Chokidar of accused Rajeev
Gupta.   He   deposed   that   on   the   date   of   the   incident   he   was
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       21
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




working   as  Chokidar   at  B16,   Greater   Kailash,   the   residence   of
Rajeev   Gupta   in   1999,   Rajeev   Gupta   alongwith   his   wife   and
Sidharth Gupta had shifted to 50, Golf Links but full family had
not shifted   as Shrawan, the elder son of Rajeev Gupta had not
shifted   from   Greater   Kailash.     On   10.1.99,   at   about   8   am,   he
received a telephonic call from a servant   of Rajeev Gupta that
the   Chowkidar   at   50,   Golf   Links   had   been   taken   away   by   the
police.  Therefore, DW7 reached  at 50, Golf Links.  He testified
that he saw Rajeev Gupta and his wife at 10­10.15 am and at that
time Rajeev Gupta was inside his house.   He also testified that
there was no arrangement for washing the cars in the Drive Way.
DW8   Dr.   Deepak   Bawa  is   the   family   physician   of
accused   Rajeev   Gupta.     He   testified   that   Rajeev   Gupta   suffers
from Diabetes and high Blood Pressure.    He testified that Rajeev
Gupta plays  cards  everyday till   late night and wakes up fairly
late.    On his medical advice,  Rajeev Gupta also takes sleeping
pills  five to six times in a month.
DW9 Sudhir Sareen  testified that his daughter Parul
was   engaged   with   Sidharth   Gupta   on   8.1.99   and   there   was   a
Dinner at  his residence in the night intervening 9/10­1­1999.  In
the said dinner, Sidharth Gupta,  Rajeev Gupta and  his wife were
also present.   He testified that Sidharth Gupta and Parul left to
attend an Engagement Ceremony of   their common friend.   The
dinner   at   their   residence   was   over   by   2.30   am   on   10.1.99.
Sidharth Gupta and Parul returned at   4 am.   At 7 am Sidharth
left their house.   Witness testified that he received a telephonic
call from Sidharth Gupta that car of Sanjeev Nanda was parked
his house and PCR Van was also parked outside his house.
The
witness testified that   he reached at 50, Golf Links in his car at
about 8 'O' clock.  SHO  Lodhi Colony asked him to get the  gate
opened.   This witness took the police to the Drawing Room and
found   Sidharth   Gupta   and   Manik   Kapur   there.     She   made
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       22
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




inquiries  from Sidharth Gupta and Manik Kapur as to whose car
it was ?    Witness  testified that SHO arrested him for destruction
of evidence presuming that  he was  Rajeev Gupta  and took him,
Sidharth   Gupta       and   Manik   Kapur     to   police   station   Lodhi
Colony.   He also    testified   that there was no washing of the
car.    From     police   station,   he   telephonically   called   his   friends
including Ms Himi Gupta, advocate who reached there in about
45   minutes.       Police   then   let   this   witness   go   and   Himi   Gupta
advocate told him that police officers had mistaken him as Rajeev
Gupta.       He   testified   that   when   he   reached       50,   Golf   Links,
Rajeev Gupta was sleeping upstairs in the  room.   This witness
also testified that  the  Rajeev Gupta normally wakes up at 10 am
everyday.
Accused   Manik   Kapur   did   not   prefer   to   lead   evidence   in
defence.
A COURT WITNESS NAMELY SUNIL KULKARNI

       In the   present case, one witness Sunil Kulkarni had been
dropped   by   the   prosecution.     He   was   summoned   as   a   court
witness by this court later on.   The defence is strongly assailing
his   credibility   and   at   one   stage   the   prosecution   had     almost
condemned him.    Ld defence counsel has drawn my attention to
an Ordersheet dt.  10.10.07 wherein   I had   written that some
evidence has come in  deposition of  witness Sunil Kulkarni and
prior   to   it   there   was   no   evidence   against   Sanjeev   Nanda.     Ld
defence   counsels   have   argued   that     witness   Sunil   Kulkarni   is
unreliable witness and  except his evidence, this court itself had
admitted   that  there  was   no   evidence   against  accused     Sanjeev
Nanda.  I make it clear that it was only a prima facie opinion and
the said ordersheet  should be read  that    earlier there was no
direct evidence against accused Sanjeev Nanda.
SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       23
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




         Since   the   witness   Sunil   Kulkarni     has   been     put   to
vehement attack by the defence, let me appreciate the totality of
the evidence by excluding the testimony of  Sunil Kulkarni and to
see as to whether the prosecution is able to prove its case beyond
reasonable doubt if we exclude the testimony of Sunil Kulkarni.
I take each issue one by one .
WHETHER THE OFFENDING VEHICLE WAS  A TRUCK
OR BMW CAR  BEARING  NUMBER  M­312­LYP?
Although during the entire trial the accused appeared   to
be denying that accident took place with the BMW car number
M­312­LYP.  However, at the stage of final arguments, Ld defence
counsels     fairly   admitted     that   in   views   of   overwhelming
evidence, they would not be   able to deny that black coloured
BMW Car  M­312­LYP was involved in this offence.  Therefore, I
am not inclined to discuss this evidence in detail.     As per the
testimony   of   SI     Kailash   Chand,   there   were   broken   pieces   of
number plate  of      a  vehicle  which  were  assembled  and it was
found to be a number plate having registration No.  M­312­LYP.
One rear view glass was found lying at the spot .  One trail of oil
starting from the point of offence till 50 Golf Links was found by
Inspector   Jagdish Pandey and police reached 50 Golf Links by
following this trail.     Mechanical Inspection    EXPW14/B  of this
BMW car shows that the   oil reserve   of the vehicle was empty.
Rear   view   mirror   and   the   front   number   plate   of   the   car   was
missing.     Bonnet and the front wind screen of the car was also
damaged.  Therefore, it stands proved  beyond  reasonable doubt
that the offending vehicle was   this BMW car and not the truck
as testified by  PW2  Manoj Malik.
SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       24
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




WHO WAS DRIVING THE BMW CAR?
Ld defence counsels argue that there is   no evidence on
record   to show that this car was   driven by   accused Sanjeev
Nanda.  It is argued that even Sunil Kulkarni does not state that
accused Sanjeev Nanda was driving this car.
I have already stated that the testimony of Sunil Kulkarni
would be discussed later on because   presently, I am discussing
as to whether the entire evidence on record   sans the testimony
of Sunil Kulkarni proves the prosecution case  or not.   It is not in
dispute that this BMW car  belongs to  Sonali  Nanda who is real
sister of accused Sanjeev Nanda.  It is not in dispute that Sonali
Nanda and  her father Suresh Nanda only reside  in  their house
at   4,   Prithviraj   Road,   whereas   accused   Sanjeev   Nanda   resides
with her mother in another house ie D 108, Defence Colony.  As
per the testimony of  DW 1  Sumitra Nanda  who is grandmother
of accused Sanjeev Nanda, his father Suresh Nanda was abroad.
Even as per prosecution case, Suresh Nanda returned to India on
11.1.99.   Therefore, there were no other family members in the
house   of Sonali Nanda except   herself in the night intervening
9.1.99   and   10.1.99.           A   Notice  was  issued     by  Investigating
Officer  to   state   as  to   who   was  driving   the   vehicle  on   the   said
date.
It is pertinent to note that she did not   answer to this
notice.   Sonali Nanda lives in India itself   and she could have
been examined by   accused Sanjeev Nanda to   prove that either
this vehicle was being driven by herself or by some other person
which   was   in   her   exclusive   knowledge.     Non   examination   of
Sonali Nanda who could have proved as to who was driving the
vehicle on the said date is a very strong   circumstance against
accused Sanjeev Nanda.   It is pertinent to note that   BMW car is
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       25
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




very expensive vehicle.   There is no allegation that   this vehicle
had been stolen on the night of  9.1.1999. It is very strange that
even the chowkidar/security guard who produced the register did
not state as to who had driven away the said car.  I may point out
that perusal of the entire  file would show that  prosecution did
not       examine     a   few     material   witnesses   for   example     the
particular   security   guard   who   made   entry     that   one   Baba   had
taken   away   this   car.     Was   it   deliberate?   Accused   has   not
produced any defence   evidence as to which person among his
family   is   called   as  Baba.     I   am   of   the   opinion     that   all   the
circumstances clearly point out towards only  one direction.  The
prosecution alleges that due to  impact of the accident, one lip of
accused Sanjeev Nanda got some injury and blood of it fell on the
steering of BMW Car.   This blood was found to be of B group.
Accused Sanjeev Nanda is also of B positive group.   His blood
from   lip   was   also   found   of   his   jersey   recovered   by   the   police.
Even   as   per   the   defence   version,   this   injury   was   recent.     The
presence of   fresh injury on the lip of   accused Sanjeev Nanda,
finding of blood on the steering of  B group and finding of blood
on the jersey of accused Sanjeev Nanda leaves me   in no doubt
that this is accused Sanjeev Nanda  himself who was driving the
offending vehicle at the time of the offence and he received the
injury due to the impact of  the car hitting  the  persons standing
on the road.   Ld defence counsels  have  vehemently argued that
B group does not  mean  anything and it could be B negative also.
The possibility cannot be ruled out   that RH factor of the blood
lifted from the steering could   be negative whereas the blood of
accused Sanjeev Nanda is   B Positive.     Though, there is some
substance   in the arguments of Ld defence counsels but it must
not be forgotten that the court has to see the cumulative effects
of all the circumstances.
In the present case it cannot be   said
that the blood lifted from the spot does not belong to   accused
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       26
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




Sanjeev   Nanda     Presence   of   injury   on   his   lip   and   presence   of
blood   on   her   jersey     recovered   at   his   instance   soon   after   the
offence leads to irresistible   conclusion that this injury has been
received while accused Sanjeev Nanda was driving the offending
car  at the time of the offence.  Ld defence counsels have argued
that accused has given a suggestion that SI Ulhas Giri had hit him
on his lip.   Ld defence counsels have also drawn my attention to
the testimony of   DW1   Sumita Nanda   that the police officials
had given two or three  blows on the mouth of accused Sanjeev
Nanda,   due   to   which   blood   oozed   out   from   his   lips.     I   have
perused the suggestions and the testimony of DW1.    I am of the
opinion that explanation of the accused  and  testimony of DW1
on this point is unworthy of credence.  As per the testimony of SI
Ulhas Giri, Admiral S. M. Nanda was very much present at D108,
Defence Colony when he reached there.   It is a known fact that
Admiral S. M. Nanda had been a top Naval Officer.   As per the
testimony   of   DW1,   Admiral   S.   M.   Nanda   followed   the   police
when   the   police   took   Sanjeev   Nanda   etc.     In   such   a   situation
Admiral S. M. Nanda would have naturally raised an objection
about the behaviour police.  There is no evidence on record nor it
is the case of accused Sanjeev Nanda that his grand father raised
any objection to the assault by the police officers nor it is the case
of   defence   that   Admiral   S.   M.   Nanda   had   filed   any   complaint
against the police officials to their superior officers.   It must be
kept in mind that Admiral S. M. Nanda is not an ordinary citizen.
He is a highly respected persons who had served the nation in his
own times.   He could not have tolerated infraction of law by a
small officer of law enforcing agency.   I have carefully perused
the MLC of Sanjeev Nanda.   Here also Sanjeev Nanda had not
stated   anywhere   to   the   doctor   that   police   had   assaulted   him.
Had he done so, the doctor would have recorded it. Otherwise
also, I do not find any reason as to why the  police official would
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       27
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




beat up  accused Sanjeev Nanda.
In the present case, the videography of the vehicle was done
starting   from   the   place   of   offence   up   to   50,   Golf   Links.       Ld.
defence   counsels   argue   that   in   the   video,   the   finger   print
Proficient is shown rubbing the powder on the steering of     the
car with the help of a brush  and no blood stain is   visible on it.
It is argued that due to this reason the prosecution case becomes
highly doubtful..  Ld Special Public Prosecutor on the other hand
submits that the quantity of blood on the steering was very small.
Further, the powder was rubbed on the steering very gently to lift
finger prints.  This  powder will not change the character of the
blood.   It is argued by Ld. Prosecutor that after five hours, this
small quantity of blood might have dried up and therefore there
is no chance that by rubbing with brush the blood might have
been rubbed off.
I have carefully gone through the videographed reel which
has been converted into CD by the court order.  Even  the Finger
Print   Expert   is   seen   putting   the   powder   on   the   steering   in
extremely gentle manner with the help of a brush to pick up the
finger prints.   The backside of the steering is not visible in this
videography/CD. Therefore, it cannot be said that each and every
portion of the steering is visible. Furthermore even on the front
side of the steering the inner portions of it, there is not sufficient
light and therefore it is not possible to say that blood might not
be present there.   No suggestion has been put to him regarding
the presence of the blood on the steering.  In such circumstances
this court has no reason to disbelieve D.S Chakotra (PW31) that
he had  picked up  blood stain from the steering of the vehicle.
SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       28
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008
It is pertinent to note that   police came to know about the
name and address of accused Sanjeev Nanda from accused Rajeev
Gupta.  When  police reached at 50 Golf Links and inquired from
accused   Rajeev   Gupta.     He   told   that   the   vehicle   belongs   to
accused   Sanjeev   Nanda   and   his   son   had   taken   him   to   his
residence   from   here.     It   is   pertinent   to   note   that   on   this   clue
received from  Rajeev Gupta, police reached the house of accused
Sanjeev Nanda.   The BMW car was not registered in India and
there was no manner in which the police could have known that
it was being driven by accused Sanjeev Nanda not police could
have known the address where Sanjeev Nanda would be found.
Though   the   statement   of   Rajeev   Gupta   stating   the   name   and
address   of   Sanjeev   Nanda   might   not   be   admissible   but   the
question is how police came to know his name and address.  The
prosecution case that police came to know about it from Rajeev
Gupta   himself   cannot   be   doubted   and   to   my   mind   the   police
investigation   in   this   regard   is   not   only   correct   but   is   also
believable.  The assurance of correctness of investigation as to
how   the   police   reached   upto   accused   Sanjeev   Nanda   is
another circumstance which connects accused Sanjeev Nanda
as the driver of the offending vehicle.
It is argued by Ld defence counsels that this statement of
Rajeev Gupta is not admissible in evidence because he was only
a witness and therefore this statement is hit by
Section 162
CrPC
and since he was not in police custody, his statement cannot be
treated   as   a   disclosure   statement   under
Section   27
of   Indian
Evidence   Act.     I   disagree   with   the   submissions   of   Ld.   Defence
Counsels.  Even if an accused is not formally taken in custody, he
still would be in custody of the police, if he has been detained by
the   police.
In   the   present   case   the   police   had   already   seen
accused Rajeev Gupta committing the offence of disappearance of
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       29
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




evidence.     Therefore   as   soon   as   gate   was   opened   and   Rajeev
Gupta was questioned, Rajeev Gupta would be deemed to be in
the   custody   of  the   police.     I   refer  to  AIR 1940  Lah  129,  AIR
1948 All 7(9) wherein it was held that the word "custody"
does   not   only   mean   custody   after   formal   arrest   but   also
includes such state of affairs in which accused can be said to
have come into the hands of police officer or can be said to
have been under some sort of surveillance or restriction.
Now the question is whether disclosure of name of accused
Sanjeev Nanda by accused Rajeev Gupta is a discovery of a fact or
not.   By now it is well settled that simple discovery of name of
accused   and   his   address   would   not   be   sufficient   to   draw   a
particular   situation   within   the   ambit   of
Section   27
of   Indian
Evidence Act.   But if one accused discloses the name of another
accused   and   such   another   accused   gets   some   material   object
recovered, in that circumstance the disclosure by the first accused
would not only be relevant under
Section 27
of Indian Evidence
Act but also shall form a piece of proved circumstance.  I refer to
1969(2)   Supreme   Court   Cases   872  in   support   of   my   above
opinion.   In the present case also name and address of accused
Sanjeev Nanda was disclosed by accused Rajeev Gupta.  After the
arrest of accused Sanjeev Nanda, he got recovered his jeans and
jersey   from   his   own   house.     Therefore   to   my   mind   all   the
ingredients of
Section 27
of Indian Evidence Act stand proved.
I   have   also   mentioned   earlier   this   court   is   examining
whether the police investigation in reaching up to Sanjeev Nanda
is correct or not.   It is the police never knew as to whom this
vehicle belonged.  The first clue came from accused Rajeev Gupta
and getting information from him.  They caught accused Sanjeev
Nanda   from   his   house.     There   is   no   reason   to   disbelieve   that
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       30
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




name   of   accused   Sanjeev   Nanda   and   his   address   should   have
come   to   the   knowledge   of   police   from   some   other   source.
Therefore,   the   police   investigation   in   reaching   up   to     accused
Sanjeev   Nanda   is   not   only   correct   but   this   has   corroborative
value to the prosecution case   that the vehicle   was driven by
none other person than accused Sanjeev Nanda.                     I   make   it
clear that entire evidence in this case has to be appreciated in the
backdrop   of   the   circumstances   that   accused   persons   have
indulged  in winning over  the  witnesses  to  such  an extent that
even the  victim of this offence is testifying that offending vehicle
was  a  truck.   I  am  reminded  of  the word  wisdom of our  own
supreme Court in AIR 1973 Supreme Court 2407 wherein it was
observed in para 23 of the judgement as under :
"A criminal trial is not like
                   a fairy tale wherein one is free
                   to   give   flight   to   one's
                   imagination   and   phantasy.     It
                   concerns itself with the question
                   as   to   whether   the   accused
                   arraigned at the trial is guilty of
                   the   crime   with   which   he   is
                   charged.     Crime   is   an   event   in
                   real   life   and   is   the   product   of
                   interplay   of   different   human
                   emotions.
In   arriving   at   the
                   conclusion   about   the   guilt   of
                   the   accused  charged  with  the
                   commission   of   a   crime,   the
                   court   has   to   judge   the
                   evidence   by   the   yardstick   of
                   probabilities,   its   intrinsic
                   worth   and   animus   of
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       31
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




                         witnesses.    Every   case   in   the
                         final   analysis   would   have   to
                         depend   upon   its   own   facts.
Although   the   benefit   of   every
                         reasonable   doubt   should   be
                         given to the accused, the courts
                         should   not   at   the   same   time
                         reject evidence which is exfacie
                         trustworthy   on   grounds   which
                         are  fanciful  or  in  the  nature  of
                         conjectures."
Summing up all the circumstances mentioned above as I
am left in no doubt  that it was accused Sanjeev Nanda who
himself was driving the vehicle at the time of the offence.
WHAT OFFENCE IS DISCLOSED ?
The   main   stress   of   the   final   arguments   had   been   as   to
whether this  offence is an offence U/S 304­A or 304
IPC
.    Sh
Prem   Kumar,   advocate   addressed   the   arguments   in   a   very
scholarly manner and submitted that the accidents of even graver
nature have been opined  to be covered U/S 304­A
IPC
and not
U/S 304
IPC
by Supreme Court of India.   Ld defence counsels
have cited numerous authorities in their favour, which I discuss
later on one by one.
On   the   other   hand,   Ld   APP   has     drawn   my   attention   to
recent judgements dated 6.9.2007 in
The State of Maharashtra
Vs Alister Anthony Pareira Criminal Appeal No.
430 of 2007,
Criminal  Appeal No. 566  of   2007  and  Criminal  Appeal  No.
475   of   2007  case   where   the   Bombay   High   Court   convicted   a
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       32
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




drunk driver of a car U/S 304
IPC
which crushed seven persons
on the foot path in the night.
I have already stated that presently I am considering this
evidence  excluding the  testimony of Sunil Kulkarni.
I have perused
Pareira
's  case of Bombay High Court and I
am of the opinion that it is  a treatise  on the question  as to what
constitutes knowledge. In fact, each and every sentence of that
Judgment requires to be quoted here  but I refrain from it for the
sake of brevity.
First of all, let me quote Section 304­A
IPC
.
     304­A. Causing death by negligence - Whoever causes the
death   of   any   person   by   doing   any   rash   or   negligent   act  not
amounting   to   culpable   homicide,   shall   be   punished   with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to two years, or with fine, or with both.
The bare perusal of this Section would show that first of all,
the court should determine   as to whether   offence is culpable
homicide. If   answer is "yes", Section 304­A would have to be
expelled.  If answer is no, then the court should see whether the
offence is covered u/s 304­A
IPC
or was it a pure accident.
If it is purely an accident covered under
Section 80
IPC, the
court  would  have no  option but to  acquit  the  doer  of the  act,
howsoever grave  the consequences may be.
Section 80
IPC deals
with accidents or misfortune and exempts such acts from penal
liability,  if done  by lawful  means  and  with  proper  care  and
caution.  The facts of the case would clearly show that there was
no proper care and caution observed by the accused while driving
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       33
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




the said vehicle and therefore
Section 80
IPC would come to his
rescue.
There had been a misconception that causing of death by a
motor   vehicle   would   simply   draw   the   criminal   liability   under
Section 304A
IPC.
In  (1976)   1   SCC   889,  the   Supreme   Court   of   India   has
indicated that such offences may fall under Section 304A, Section
299   as   well   as
Section   300
of   IPC.     The   observations   of   the
Supreme Court are of great importance to the present case also.  I
reproduce   the   relevant   paragraph   no.4   of   this   judgement   as
under :
Section 304A carves out a
                     specific offence where death is
                     caused   by   doing   a   rash   or
                     negligent act and that act does
                     not   amount   to   culpable
                     homicide  under
Section   299
IPC   of   murder   under   Section
300
IPC
.   If a person  wilfully
                     drives a motor vehicle into the
                     midst of a crowd and thereby
                     causes death to some persons,
                     it   will   not   be   a   case   of   mere
                     rash and negligent driving and
                     the   act   will   amount   to
                     culpable homicide.   Each case
                     will,   therefore,   depend   upon
                     the particular facts established
                     against the accused.
SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       34
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008
Ld.  Defence  Counsel has  pointed  out the  word  "wilfully"
and   submits   that   it   means   "intentional".     I   disagree   with   the
submissions of Ld. Defence Counsel.  The word "wilfully" used in
the   above   said   judgement   does   not   have   any   legal   equivalent.
Therefore   its   meaning   can   range   from  "wishful"  to
"intentional".    THE   NEW   SHORTER   OXFORD   ENGLISH
DICTIONARY may be referred in this regard.  If a vehicle is being
driven "intentionally" to kill someone, the act would amount to
murder even if there is no person at the place of offence except
the   victim.     Therefore   the   word  "wilfully"  must   mean
"wishfully"  which   would   be   a   equivalent   term   for
"recklessness".  Therefore the inference of the above quoted part
of   judgement   is   that   if   a   person   with   a   great   degree   of
recklessness drives a motor vehicle into the midst of a crowd, the
offence would fall either under third part of
Section 299
IPC or
under
Section 300(4)
IPC.
I may point out that the illustration given by the Supreme
Court   in   the   above   stated   judgement   is   equivalent   to   an
illustration (d) to
Section 300
of IPC, which reproduce as under:
"A without any excuse fires
                   a loaded cannon into a crowd of
                   persons and kills one of them.  A
                   is guilty of murder, although he
                   may not have had a premeditated
                   design   to   kill   any   particular
                   individual."
It   must   be   kept   in   mind   that
Section   300
of  IPC   defines
"murder"  in  four   ways  and   there   are   four   corresponding
illustrations   answering   each   situation.     The   illustration   (d)
quoted   above   answers   the  fourth  situation   in   which   culpable
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       35
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




homicide   would   amount   to   murder.     This   fourth   situation   is
reproduced as under :
4thly.­If   the   person
                committing the act knows that it
                is  so   imminently   dangerous
                that it must,  in all probability,
                cause   death  or   such   bodily
                injury as is likely to cause death,
                and   commits   such   act   without
                any excuse for incurring the risk
                of causing death or such injury as
                aforesaid.
A   perusal   of   the   above   stated   portion   of   the   judgement
would   make   it   clear   that   if  a  situation   so   warrants,   a  reckless
driving   may   be   covered   under
Section   300(4)
IPC   (which   has
been quoted above by me) or it may also fall under third part of
Section 299
IPC which makes an act causing death of a human
being punishable if the offender acts with the knowledge that
he was likely by such act to cause death.
Therefore, in nutshell the legal proposition can be summed
up  like this.  The duty of the court is to first rule out a culpable
homicide   after   considering   the   quality   of   knowledge  attributed
under Section 300(4) or in third part of
Section 299
IPC and if
the facts and circumstances do not fall in any of those provisions,
then the court would consider the question as to whether offence
U/S 304 A
IPC
is disclosed or not.
Now let me discuss as to what is the scheme of the
Indian
Penal Code
and what are  graver offences where the question of
knowledge is involved.  While referring the scheme of the court I
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       36
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




am   drawing   heavily   from   an   article     with   the   title
RECKLESSNESS UNDER THE
INDIAN PENAL CODE
by Stanley
Meng Heong Yeo an Australian author.  The article is published
in Volume 30 of Journal of the Indian Law Institute.  (may be
cited as 293 Journal of the Indian Law Institute [Vol. 30 : 3].  It
is made clear that I would not be referring the article verbatim
but I am placing the copy of the same on judicial record.
The   first   question   to   be   determined   is   what   kind   of
recklessness   is   punishable.     It   is,   by   now,   a   well   settled   legal
proposition   that   a   simple   reckless   act   or   a   simple   rash   or
negligent act would not constitute a criminal offence, though it
may invite civil liability.
In order to make a reckless act punishable, it must be gross
in nature.  As soon as a gross reckless act has resulted in death,
the   further   inquiry   would   be   as   to   whether   any   kind   of
knowledge can be imputed to the doer.  The next inquiry should
be as to what is the scheme of the
Indian Penal Code
in the cases
involving   human   deaths   by   a   gross   reckless   act   done   with   a
particular knowledge.   I most humbly emphasize that in all the
case   law/authorities   submitted   by   the   prosecution   and   the
defence, this issue has not been discussed.   Therefore, drawing
the essence from the above mentioned article, I venture to discuss
the scheme of
Indian Penal Code
as under :
KNOWLEDGE  OF FIRST DEGREE

      This   is   defined   U/S   300   (4)
IPC
and   the   knowledge
required under this Section is that act was imminently dangerous
that  death would be caused in all probabilities.
SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       37
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008
Such act would be punishable U/S 302
IPC
.  Such type of
offences are of highest degree of gross recklessness.
KNOWLEDGE OF SECOND DEGREE

        Where death  is caused   by an act which    the    offender
knows   is   likely   to   cause   death.     This   knowledge   has   been
mentioned   in  3rd  part   of
Section   299
IPC  and   the   offence   is
punishable U/S 304 II
IPC
.  Such type of offences may be termed
as the cases of substantial gross recklessness.
KNOWLEDGE OF THIRD DEGREE

     Where   the   act   has   dangerous   consequences   like   causing
death,   but  the   offender  hopes  that   the  same  would   not  occur.
This offence is covered U/S 304­A
IPC
.  Such type of offences are
the cases of lowest degree of gross recklessness and may be called
rash acts.
These degrees refer to the degrees of  gravity of recklessness
on the part of the offender and various degrees of knowledge of
the consequences imputed to the offender.
I   would   appreciate   as   to   what   type   of   knowledge   the
accused   Sanjeev   Nanda   possessed   at   the   time   of   the   offence.
Before discussing it I would discuss two more points.  First, what
the scene of crime speaks and what is the implication of driving a
vehicle when the driver is excessively drunk.  Where ever I refer
the word "drunk", it means that the driver has, in his blood
alcohol exceeding 30 mg. Per 100 ml. of blood which is one
ingredient of
Section 185
of Motor Vehicle Act.
SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       38
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




SCENE OF CRIME
As   translated   in   English,   the   scene   of   crime   has   been
narrated by SI Kailash Chand in the rukka as under :
After the receipt the DD, I
                         along with Ct. Jagan Lal reached
                         the   spot   i.e.   Car   Care   Center,
                         Petrol Pump, Lodhi Road, where
                         three   persons   namely   Ct.   Ram
                         Raj   -   DHG,   Ct.   Rajan   Kumar
                         (CRPF) and unknown age about
                         35   years   were   found   and   four
                         persons   were   reported   to   be
                         shifted to hospital by PCR Van.
A broken No. of plate was found
                         lying.     After   assembling   broken
                         pieces   the   particulars   were
                         revealed as M­312­LYP and Park
                         Lane and BMW.  At the spot the
                         black   colour   piece   of   bumper
                         and rear wind screen and black
                         colour   broken   piece   of   the   car
                         were   found   scattered   in   the
                         radius   of   100/125   ft.   Skid
                         marks  of a  vehicle   were  seen
                         on   the   road.   The   head   of
                         unknown   body   was   bound
                         crushed,   brain   matter   was
                         found out side the skull.   The
                         body of Ct. Ram Raj was found
                         crushed due to passing of the
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       39
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




                         vehicle,   his   right   leg   was
                         found detached and was lying
                         at   distance   of   10'   -   15'.   The
                         abdomen of Rajan Kumar was
                         found   burst   and   the   blood   is
                         spread   on   the   road   for
                         considerable distance.......   On
                         the   spot   pieces   of  flesh   was
                         found   scattered   in   a   large
                         area.     These   facts   were
                         indicating   that   death   of   these
                         three   persons   occurred   due   to
                         forceful impact of vehicle no. M­
                         312,   LYP,  there   were   skid
                         marks upto 30' - 40'........
Investigation Officer SI Kailash Chand prepared a rough site
plan Ex.PW58/B.  As per observation of the IO at point A of site
plan was the place where first impact occurred.  Blood is lying  at
point A.  At point B which is at 38 steps away from point A, blood
is lying and there are blood stains and skid marks.  At point C on
the middle divider there are friction marks of the tyre.  Point C is
eight steps away from point B.  At point D one dead body is lying
having its right leg amputated.  There are blood and friction/drag
marks from point C to D.  At point E one dead body is lying near
electric pole no.12 and blood as well as drag marks are seen.  At
point F another dead body is lying and point point F is 26 steps
away from the point E.  From the point E to F the drag marks and
blood are visible.  At point G which five steps away from point F,
one amputated leg is lying in front of electric pole no.13.   Pieces
of   bumper   and   broken   pieces   of   glass   were   lying   scattered.
Bumper was black colour.
SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       40
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008
One oil trail was also observed by the Investigating Officer
going towards Madarsa Safdarjang.   In this site plan point B is
seen at electric pole no.11.
The description of scene of crime as observed in the rukka is
corroborated   by   the   site   plan   prepared   by   the   Investigating
Officer and the videography done by the police of the scene of
crime.  Since the site plan is made by Investigating Officer on his
own observations, the same is admissible in evidence.  The points
where blood and dead bodies are lying, skid marks and the oil
trail prove it clearly that the offending vehicle was coming from
the side of Nizamuddin and after the offence went towards side
of Madarsa Safdarjang.   This scene of crime makes it clear that
the offending vehicle first hit the persons standing on the left side
(i.e. at point A) of the road near footpath where some blood is
seen lying.   Thereafter the vehicle took a right turn and hit the
central verge.   The videography scene of crime (now converted
into   a   CD)   would   show   that   there   are   three   parallel   dragged
marks of blood on the road upto to a certain distance.  As per the
rukka and the site plan, thereafter one body is lying and second
body is lying after that and third body is lying at a distance.   This
leads   to   only   one   conclusion   that   these   persons   had   been
entangled with the car and thereafter they were dragged by the
offending   vehicle   and   they   fell   one   by   one   and   were   also   got
crushed   and   amputated.     I   have   already   discussed   that   the
offending   vehicle   was   BMW   Car   driven   by   accused   Sanjeev
Nanda.
Since the part of dead bodies were strewn over a large area,
it can be understood that the car was being driven an extremely
high speed when it hit the unfortunate persons.   The road is a
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       41
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




well lit area as is clear from the site plan where electric poles
no.11, 12 and 13 are shown.  In fact pole no.11 is at a very short
distance   from   point   A   where   the   vehicle   struck   first   and   it   is
almost at that very point where Investigating Officer has shown a
point  B.   Even   PW1   Hari   Shanker   has   admitted   that   there   are
electric poles on the middle pavement of the road and there was
sufficient light.  It is no one's case that these electric poles were
not   illuminated.     As   per   PW15   S.   C.   Gupta,   the   Director   and
Incharge   Meterorologial   Office,   Safdarjung   Airport,   New   Delhi,
there   was   visibility   of   1000   meters   on   10.1.99   at   5:30   am.
Therefore it is clear that no mist and there was lot of visibility at
the spot at the time of offence.  Therefore it cannot be said that
at the time of offence that accused could not have seen the few
persons standing on the road.   Those persons after being hit by
the BMW car were got entangled in it and still accused kept on
driving the vehicle for quite a long distance.  The accused has not
shown any circumstance that he could not see that few of the
persons had come under his car.   Therefore I am of the opinion
that the scene of crime itself proves beyond doubt that accused
had seen that the BMW car being driven by him had dragged the
three persons for a long distance and there is nothing on record
to show that accused was disabled due to any reason such as lack
of electricity to know that a few persons are entangled under the
bonnet of his car.
TESTIMONY OF MANOJ MALIK (PW2)

       He has testified that offending vehicle was a truck.  Such a
testimony by a victim of the offence himself would lead to only
one   conclusion   that   he   has   been   won   over   by   the   defence.
Reaching upto the final arguments, even defence had admitted
that   the   offence   was   committed   by   the   BMW   car   in   question.
SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       42
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008
Despite   his   being   won   over,   he   has   supported   the   prosecution
case on a few points.  I clarify that while perusing his testimony, I
would use the word "offending vehicle" instead of truck.   This
witness testifies that on 10.1.99 at about 4:30 am he was going
to   railway   station   along   with   his   friend   Gulab   to   see   him   off.
When   they   were   proceedings   on   foot   and   reached   near   petrol
pump,   Lodhi   Road   the   three   police   officials   stopped   them   to
check   their   belongings.     When   these   police   officials   started
checking the belongings near the patri, a vehicle came at a very
fast speed from Nizamuddin side and hit them.  He testified that
his two companions and three police men came underneath
the vehicle.  He testified one more fact in his cross examination
by   Sh.   R.   K.   Anand   Ld.   Defence   Counsel   for   accused   Sanjeev
Nanda   that  this   offending   vehicle   had   stopped   at   a   little
distance.  This is a very important fact which would corroborate
the testimony of court witness Sunil Kulkarni (to be considered in
the   later   part   of   this   judgement).     Suffice   it   to   say   that   some
glimpses   of  truth   have   come   out  even   from   the   mouth   of   this
hostile witness and his testimony fully corroborate the inference
which is drawn from the observations of the scene of crime by the
Investigating   Officer.     His   testimony   has   proved   that   a   few
persons came underneath the offending vehicle.   Scene of crime
clearly shows drag marks and bodies fallen at various points one
after   another.     Therefore   the   testimony   of   PW2   Manoj   Malik
coupled with the scene of crime prove beyond reasonable doubt
that the offending vehicle came from the side of Nizamuddin, hit
a   few   persons   on   the   left   side   Patri,   who   came   under   the
offending vehicle and thereafter took a turn and hit the middle
divider.   From this place which is shown at point B in the site
plan, the offending vehicle started dragging the persons who had
come under it.   These three dead bodies fell one by one after a
certain distances.
SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       43
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008
In such a scenario and in view of the above discussions,
it is clear that it is a case of causing death of human beings
by an act of gross recklessness on the part of accused Sanjeev
Nanda.
HOW   DO   WE   MEASURE   THE   DEGREE   OF   GROSS
RECKLESSNESS WITH A SPECIFIC KNOWLEDGE

     Ld. Defence Counsels have referred a long list of judgements
and though it will entail lengthy discussion, however in view of
the nature of offence all these authorities have to be considered.
In  AIR   2005   SC   3180  where   the   Supreme   Court   was
dealing with a case of medical negligence.  The facts in our case
are   not   a   case   of   negligence   rather   the   same   is   case   of
recklessness.  There is a great deal of difference between the two
legal  terms  and   therefore   this   case   is  not  similar   to   the   above
stated judgement of Supreme Court.  Otherwise also the Supreme
Court  in  the  said  judgement  specifically  noted   in  para  35   that
"The   criminal   law   has   invariably   placed   the   medical
professionals on a pedestal different from ordinary mortals.
The
Indian Penal Code
enacted as far back as in."  Moreover,
the   death   in   the   said   case   did   not   occur   due   to   any   direct
negligence of the medical man rather it was due to the fact that
an oxygen cylinder which was immediately required to save the
child   was   found   to   be   empty.     Therefore   the   Supreme   Court
quashed the criminal proceedings against the doctor.
To my mind, the result of this particular case would have
been   totally   different   if   an   unqualified   doctor   in   highly
intoxicated state had performed an operation on a patient.
In
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       44
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




such a situation a knowledge as specified under
Section 300(4)
IPC  or third   part  of
Section  299
IPC   could  be validly  imputed
upon him considering the attending circumstances.
In  (2000) 7 Supreme Court Cases 72  one passenger was
boarding the bus.   When the bus moved forward, the passenger
fell out of the vehicle and was run over by the rear wheel of the
bus.  The Supreme Court acquitted the driver of the bus as on the
facts itself it is clearly an accident.   These facts are totally not
applicable to this case.
In case (2007) 3 Supreme Court Cases 474  the Supreme
Court was dealing with the case where a driver of lorry drove the
vehicle in a extremely high speed and dashed against a tree and
caused death of three persons who were the passengers of the
said lorry.   In this case the prosecution has pressed the charges
under
Section 304A
IPC only and the Supreme Court  upheld the
conviction   under
Section   304A
IPC.     Therefore   the   Supreme
Court was not dealing with a question as to whether it amounted
to offence under
Section 304
IPC or 304A
IPC
.
Otherwise also the driver of the lorry was not drunk and no
additional fact or circumstance was on record to presume that the
driver did this act with a certain knowledge.  The only evidence
against the driver was that he was driving the vehicle at a high
speed.
In  (1976)  1 SCC 889,  the accused used to drive a truck
earlier with the permission of the truck owner.   On the date of
incident, the truck had some other driver.  When the driver was
away, the accused drove away the truck with full speed straight
on a cot upon which the deceased was resting.  Due to this reason
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       45
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




the deceased was thrown away about 10 feet and was got killed.
The   accused  was charged  under
Section  302
IPC.     High Court
converted   the   conviction   into
Section   304   (II)
IPC,   however
Supreme Court held that it was simply a case under
Section 304A
IPC.   The relevant facts which were considered by the Supreme
Court   were   that  the   truck   while   being   driven   was   trying   to
turn towards the Kutcha road near the cot and accused was
unable to control the vehicle in high speed while taking the
turn.    The   Supreme   Court   also   considered   that   there   was   no
direct impact of persons with the truck.   This fact ruled out the
intention.  In this case also the driver was not drunk.
In AIR 2007 SC 2376, the Supreme Court was dealing with
a case where a boy aged 10 years was run over by a bus driver in
the middle of the road.  The investigation by the police revealed
that there was evidence to the effect that even the passengers in
the bus were alarmed of the enormous, speed in which  it was
being driven and had cautioned the driver to stop even crying, as
they had seen the school children crossing the road in a queue.
The   investigation  also  revealed   that   even  the   children   crossing
the  road  had  raised  both   hands  for stopping  the  vehicle.     The
passengers  and   pedestrians  were  of  the  view  that  the  bus  was
being driven at a high speed and that they had cried aloud to
stop the bus.   It was, in spite of all these, that the bus ran over
the said student on his head and the bus could be stopped only
15 to 20 feet ahead of the spot of occurrence.  In the light of the
said   evidence,   the   investigating   officer   felt   that   there   was   real
intention on the part  of the appellant/driver of the bus to cause
death   of   persons   to   whom   harm   may   be   caused   by   reason   of
hitting   the   bus   and   he   was   charged   with   offence   punishable
under
Section 302
IPC.  The court below found that no intention
had been proved in the case.  But, at the same time, the accused
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       46
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




acted with the knowledge that it was likely to cause death.   So,
the act committed by the appellant was culpable homicide not
amounting to murder punishable under Section 304 Part II
IPC
.
Convicting him for the said offence, he was sentenced to undergo
rigorous   imprisonment   for   five   years   etc.     The   High   Court   of
Kerala upheld the conviction.  The Supreme Court however held
that   it   was   only   a  case   under
Section  304A
IPC.     Though   the
Supreme Court has not given any reason as to why it was not an
offence  under   Section  304   (Part  2)
IPC
,   but  one  thing   is  very
clear from the facts that the driver was not drunk.
In (2000) 1 Supreme Court Cases 662, a truck driver was
convicted   under
Section   302
IPC   for  intentionally   dashing
against a scooterist and thereby killing him.   The conviction
was   upheld   by   the   High   Court   of   Rajasthan.     However   the
Supreme Court held that prosecution was unable to prove that
the truck driver had intentionally dashed against the scooterist.
Once the ingredient of "intention" had gone, there was nothing
on   record   to   show   that   the   offence   fell   in   any   other   category
except
Section 304A
IPC.  Therefore the facts of the case before
Supreme Court are not similar to the case in hand.  I may point
out that even here the driver was not drunk.
In Kuldeep Singh vs. State of Himachal Pradesh Criminal
Appeal No. 1106 of 2008 (arising out of S.L.P. (Crl.) No. 1944
of 2008  the Supreme Court had considered a case of allegedly a
drunk driver carrying marriage party.  Driver lost its control and
the truck went off the road, rolled down in the field leaving many
persons dead and many other injured.
The careful perusal of this
case would show two things, first it is not on record that driver
was   drunk   beyond   permissible  limits,  in  fact   it  was  only   an
allegation   that   driver   was   drunk,  second  the   Supreme   Court
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       47
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




while  considering  the  circumstances  did   not  take   it  in  account
that the driver was drunk.  The only circumstance considered by
the  Supreme Court was that  three  witnesses  had  stated  that
the vehicle was being driven as if it was an aeroplane.  Hence
practically the case before Supreme Court was not that of a drunk
driver.
In (2004) 10 SCC 794, the victim was dashed by a vehicle
and was killed.  On this very fact the driver was convicted under
Section 302
IPC by the trial court.  The Supreme Court held that
from the facts proved neither the intention to kill the victim, nor
the   knowledge   that   the   act   is   likely   to   cause   death   can   be
inferred.  The Supreme Court convicted the driver under
Section
304A
IPC.  I am of the opinion that the facts of the present case
before this court are much a lot more grave showing a certain
knowledge, which I am discussing in this judgement.
In  (2008) 1 SCC 791, a bus was hit by a train at a railway
crossing in which several persons were got injured and two died.
The   accused   was   charged   under
Section   302
IPC   and   under
Section 304
IPC.  The Supreme Court held that it was only a case
under
Section 304A
IPC.  From the perusal of the judgement, the
relevant   facts   which   weighed   are   that   it   was   a  unmanned
crossing.  Secondly the engine of the train hit the rear portion of
the bus and there was also a great chance that it might be only an
error of judgement on the part of the driver of the bus.  It must
be noted here that the driver was not drunk at that time.
A perusal  of all these  authorities cited by Ld. Defence
Counsels would show that all these cases were the cases of
simple  rash  driving  and  in none  of those  cases  the  drivers
were drunk.
SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       48
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008
The present case, on the other hand, is of a very high degree
in the gravity of gross recklessness.  The accused was so heavily
drunkard that a knowledge can be validly imputed upon him that
if he drives the vehicle he is likely to cause death of a human
being passing on the road.  Despite being drunk, accused instead
of   carefully   and   slowly   driving   the   vehicle,   threw   all   the
precautions away and drove the vehicle at excessively high speed.
Ld. Defence Counsels have repeatedly referred to Holloway,
J., who defines culpable rashness as under :
"Culpable   rashness   is
                         acting   with   the   consciousness
                         that the mischievous and illegal
                         consequences   may   follow   but
                         with the hope that they will not,
                         and  often  with the  belief that
                         the   actor   has   taken   sufficient
                         precautions   to   prevent   their
                         happening.     The   imputability
                         arises   from   acting   despite   the
                         consciousness                 (luxuria).
Culpable   negligence   is   acting
                         without   the   consciousness   that
                         the   illegal   and   mischievous
                         effect   will   follow,   but   in
                         circumstances   which   show   that
                         the   actor   has   not   exercised   the
                         caution   incumbent   upon   him,
                         and   that   if   he   had   he   would
                         have   had   the   consciousness.
SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       49
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




                         The imputability arises from the
                         neglect   of   the   civic   duty   of
                         circumspection."
This definition of the "culpable rash act" is qualified by the
word that the actor believes that he has taken all precautions
to   prevent   the   mischievous   and   illegal   consequences.    This
definition has been approved by the Supreme Court in various
judgements
referred above
by Ld. Defence Counsels.  Ld. Defence
Counsels   are   also   taking   the   shelter   of   this   definition.     Here
"culpable rashness"  is equivalent to "gross rashness"  which is
an ingredient of
Section 304A
IPC.   This definition would very
clearly show that an offence under
Section 304A
IPC would be
made out only when accused had been grossly rash and negligent
though he believes that he had taken sufficient precautions to
prevent the consequences and therefore though he knew the
consequences of his act, but, he never hoped for it.   As soon
as this belief goes, the culpable rashness would become of a
higher  degree  and if this culpable rashness has resulted in
death,   the   appropriate   provisions   other   than
Section   304A
IPC would be applicable. In the present case all the precautions
have   been   thrown   away   to   the   winds   by   the   accused   Sanjeev
Nanda.     He   should   not   have   driven   the   vehicle   while   he   was
under   such   a   great   intoxication.     Even   if   in   view   of   certain
circumstances he found it necessary to drive the vehicle back to
his home, it was his duty to be extra cautious while driving the
vehicle.   At least he could have driven it at a very slow speed.
Once these precautions have been given go by, it cannot be said
that he had a belief that he had taken all precautions to prevent
the disastrous consequences.
Therefore in the present case, the
degree   of   gross   recklessness   would   go   beyond   the   purview   of
Section 304A IPC and would fall somewhere up.
SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       50
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008
WHAT DIFFERENCE DOES A DRUNK DRIVING MAKE?
While discussing the case law cited by Ld. Defence Counsel
above, I have differentiated the judgments of Supreme Court with
the present case on the ground that none of those cases were of
drunken driving.
I am stressing upon the drunken condition of a person time
and again with a view  to ascertain  as to what knowledge can be
imputed to a drunken person who is driving  a vehicle.    I advert
to
Section 185
of Motor Vehicle Act.    As per this provision, if  a
drunken person  (where ever the word drunken person appear, it
should   be   inferred   that   he   has   consumed   the   liquor   beyond
permissible limit) attempts to drive a vehicle, he can be punished
to imprisonment up to two years (for the first offence six months
and the second offence upto two years).  What is the purpose of
punishing a   drunk person   even at the stage when he has only
attempted   to   drive   the   vehicle   and   has   not   actually   driven   it.
The   purpose   is   very   clear.     The   Legislature   imputes   a   specific
knowledge   to   the   offender   that   if   he   drives   the   vehicle   in   a
drunken   state,   the   accused   would   be   creating   an   extremely
dangerous situation for the passengers on the road as well as for
the occupants of the motor vehicle and the such driving is likely
to lead to disastrous consequences like death of a human being.
There is   another provision   in a
Motor Vehicle Act
which
requires to be looked into.  As per
Section 184
Motor Vehicle Act
a person who drives a vehicle  in dangerous manner is punishable
up   to  two   years  of   imprisonment   (for   the   first   offence   six
months, for the second offence upto two years).  This "dangerous
driving" can be equated with  "gross rashness". There are cases
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       51
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




where   a  person   is  driving   a  vehicle   in   drunken   state   and   also
driving the vehicle in gross rash/dangerous manner.  Such person
would attract punishment U/S 184
Motor Vehicle Act
as well as
U/S 185
Motor Vehicle Act
.  The cumulative sentence of
Section
184
and
185
Motor Vehicle Act would be up to one year in case
of   first   offence   and   upto  four   years  in   case   of   repetition.
Therefore, in case of repetition of these offences, the cumulative
gravity offences   U/S 184 and
Section 185
of Motor Vehicle Act
would be higher than the punishment provided for the offence
Section 304­A
IPC
where the punishment provided is only up to
two   years.     Of   course   there   is   no   enhanced   sentence   for
repetition of an offence under
Section 304A
IPC.
A comparative study  of these provisions would show that in
case of rash  driving, causing death of a human being, legislation
has   thought   it   appropriate   to   punish   an   offender   to   an
imprisonment up to two years.   Whereas maximum punishment
provided under
Motor Vehicle Act
for rash driving by a drunken
driver may count upto four years even though he has not killed
any   person.     The   reasons   for   it   is   that   a   drunken   driver   is
presumed to have the knowledge that by driving the vehicle in
such state of intoxication he is likely to cause death of the human
beings.   Therefore,   to   my   mind,   a   conjoined   reading   of   above
provisions   and   the   sentencing   pattern   are   enough   to   conclude
that   if   a   drunken   person   drives   a   vehicle   in   highly   rash   or
dangerous manner and thereby kills a human being, the offence
goes beyond the purview of Section 304­A
IPC
and such gross
recklessness would either fall within   purview of
Section 300(4)
IPC which is punishable U/S 302
IPC
or within the purview of
third part of 299
IPC
which is punishable   U/S 304 ­II
IPC
.
SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       52
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008
Sh. Prem Kumar, adv. for accused Sanjeev Nanda has filed a
consultation   paper   on  Legal   Reforms   to   Combat   Road
Accidents  pertaining to  Law Commission of India.   In the end
of this paper few questions have been framed for the purpose of
suggestions/views/comments.  I reproduce the same as under :
8.3   Do   you   agree   that
                 causing   death   of   any   person
                 through   driving   under   the
                 influence   of   drink   or   drugs
                 should not merely be deemed to
                 have  been  committed   in  a  rash
                 or   negligent   manner,   but   be
                 made   an   offence   of   culpable
                 homicide   not   amounting   to
                 murder   punishable   under
Section 304
IPC?
8.4   Or,   do  you   agree   that
                 the  offence of  causing  death  of
                 any   person   through   driving
                 under the influence of drink  or
                 drugs should continue to be an
                 offence   under
Section   304A
,
                 IPC,   but   the   minimum   term   of
                 imprisonment   of   two   years   for
                 the   same   be   prescribed   in   the
                 said section?
Both   the   questions   are   very   relevant   to   the   emerging
scenario in developing country like India where a driving culture
is yet to take roots.   Regarding the first question I would say
that the deaths caused by a drunken driver do fall within the
purview of
Section 304 (II)
IPC even as per the existing law.
SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       53
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008
In fact  as per the law as stands today, if a drunken  driver
drives a motor vehicle with a great speed and rash manner in
a crowded street, he might be liable to have committed an
offence   under   fourth   part   of
Section   300
IPC   punishable
under
Section 302
IPC and in case a drunken driver drives a
motor vehicle and kills a person, his case would fall under
Section 304 (II)
IPC.   It must not be forgotten that a motor
vehicle   being   driven   by  a   drunk   driver   is   virtually   a   death
machine on the road.
Therefore to sum up the above discussion, the law imputes
the knowledge upon a drunken driver that by driving the vehicle
in   such   a   state   of   intoxication,   he   is   likely   to   cause   death   of
human being on the road.  This is the reason why the law would
punish him  even if he attempts to drive the  vehicle and though
he has not actually driving the said vehicle.    If  such a drunken
person   actually   drives   the   vehicle   and   that   too   in   highly
dangerous   manner   or   with   high   degree   of   recklessness,   the
knowledge that his act is likely to cause death of human beings
on   the   road,   becomes   more   specific   and   more   pronounced.     I
have pointed out that in all the cases which  came   before the
Supreme Court, drivers were not drunk.  On the other hand, the
evidence   on   record   makes   it   very   clear   that   accused   Sanjeev
Nanda was excessively drunk and was driving the vehicle at an
excessive  speed. In such a situation, it can be safely  inferred that
when accused Sanjeev Nanda started with his vehicle in highly
drunk state of intoxication beyond permissible limit, he started
with the knowledge that his act might result in death of some
persons.  When he drove the vehicle at extremely high speed and
did   not   even   slow   down   the   vehicle   on   seeing     seven   persons
standing on the road, his knowledge that his act is likely to cause
death, becomes more specific  and more certain.  After hitting the
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       54
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




persons  standing   on   the  road,   the   vehicle   took   a  right   turn   in
which   few   persons   who   were   underneath   the   bonnet   were
dragged and hit the right side divider.  The scene of crime shows
that there are scratch marks on point B to C on the divider.  The
videography would show that   there are three long blood drag
marks on the road.  This shows that dead bodies which had come
underneath   the   bonnet   had   been   dragged   for   quite   a   long
distance.   There is nothing   on record to presume that   accused
Sanjeev Nanda never knew that the accused persons had come
underneath  the bonnet of his car.  A look on the photographs of
BMW   car   would   show  that     due   to   impact   of  the   offence,   the
windscreen  fragmented.   In such  a situation,  I  have  no  reason
why the accused should not stop the vehicle there and then and
why he should continue with driving.       In fact, the driving of
vehicle   in   a  drunk   condition   at   a   very   highly   reckless   manner
when the windscreen had  become fragmented and opaque would
amount   to   highest     degree   of   recklessness.     Since   the   charge
containing the allegations forming the ingredients of
Section 300
(4)
IPC     has   not   been   framed,   I   am   not   inclined   to   discuss
whether the gravity of recklessness coupled with the knowledge
that his act was imminently dangerous to cause death  would not
be   discussed   by   me.     But,   to   my   mind,   the   gravity   and   the
knowledge is almost touching the boundaries of
Section 300 (4)
IPC.  In such a situation, the facts of the case can fall within the
purview of Section 299 (Part III)
IPC
and it would be unjustified
to treat the present case under
Section 304A
IPC.
Therefore the cumulative effect of the above discussion that
scene of crime as observed by the police officials, the site plan
and the videography coupled with the fact that  the driver of the
offending vehicle namely Sanjeev Nanda   was highly drunk and
the manner in which the offence was committed, definitely places
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       55
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




the   offence   on   the   highest   boundary   of
Section   304   (II)
IPC.
Once   the   gravity   is     so   serious,   as   per   the   dictum   of   Hon'ble
Supreme Court, Section 304­A
IPC
would have to be ignored.
WHETHER SUNIL KULKARNI IS  A RELIABLE WITNESS

       Till now, I have discussed the entire   evidence available on
the   judicial   record   while   excluding   the   testimony   of   Sunil
Kulkarni because  Ld defence counsels and at one stage, even the
prosecution had been assailing his credibility.  It is argued by Ld
defence  counsels  that  this   is  a  witness  who   has  no   permanent
address.  The case of cheating has been registered against him by
one Gauri Shanker.  In a programme telecast by India TV,  Gauri
Shanker told that Sunil Kulkarni was a cheat  and was in Mumbai
on   the   date   of   offence.     Ld   defence   counsels   have   drawn   my
attention to the fact that the summons of this witness  are ample
proof  of  his shady character.  Ld defence counsels have drawn
my attention to the fact that in the report on the  summons, it is
written   that   Gaurishanker   had   given   him   mobile   phone.     Ld
defence counsels have drawn my attention that in the register of
Shivalik Hotel, witness Sunil Kulkarni had given his mobile phone
number.     It   is   argued   that   if   accident   had   taken   place   in   his
presence,  he could have informed the police through his mobile
phone  which he did not.  It is submitted that the register shows
that   this   witness     left   the   hotel   in   the   evening     of   9.1.99   for
Nahan.  On the other hand , before this court, he testifies that he
had left for Bhopal.   It is argued that as per his own testimony,
this witness returned from Bhopal on 12.1.99  but he does not
stated   where   he   remained   for   three   more   days.     Ld   defence
counsels have drawn my attention that this witness approached
the police on 15.1.99.
SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       56
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008
Ld  defence counsels have  drawn  my  attention  to  the  fact
that the witness had left for Bhopal in the morning   and states
that he reached in Bhopal on the next day morning.    It is argued
that  it is impossible   and any train   takes normally 10 hours to
reach Bhopal.   It is further argued that till date, this witness was
never   been   served   upon.     Rather   he   appears   before   the   court
himself.    It is further argued by Ld defence counsels that even if
it   is   presumed   that   the   witness   was   present   at   the   spot,   his
testimony   cannot   be   relied   upon.     It   is   argued   that   he   was  in
police protection   and therefore, he was under the police hands
It is further argued that even if he had  seen the accident, he has
not testified anywhere that accused   Sanjeev Nanda was driving
the   vehicle.     Rather   at   one   place   he   testifies   that   another
occupant of the car came out of the  driver seat.  Ld counsels for
accused   argue that   such witness should be thrown   Lock stock
and barrel and his testimony should be discarded entirely, more
so, because he is a chance witness.
It   is   true   that   Sunil   Kulkarni   possesses   a   very   peculiar
personality.     He   appears   to   be   a   character   direct   from
novels   of   Charles   Dickens   and   has   very   strange   aspects   to   his
personality.  But the truth is that such people are not uncommon.
Such people behave in a very strange manner.   Normally such
persons   are   very   sharp.     But   at   the   same   time   throwing   the
evidence of such witness at first instance would not be justified.
Such persons may be truthful witnesses to an event.   If they
are   an   eye   witness   of   an   offence,   there   is   nothing     in   law   to
disbelieve   them.     However,   the   courts   would   be   at   guard   and
would be extra cautious in weighing their evidence.    In fact such
a witness  has to pass through  a close scrutiny by the court .  If
his  testimony is well corroborated, there should be no  hitch in
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       57
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




believing them.
The   prosecution   has   proved   a   register   from   the   Shiva
Continental Hotel that accused was present in Delhi on 9.1.08 till
till   12:30   pm.     Therefore   his   presence   in   Delhi   in   the   early
morning of 10.1.99   cannot be improbable.    His testimony  that
he had started for the railway station to catch    a Bhopal train is
substantiated by the fact that he   purchased   a document from
Bhopal   on   11.1.99     and   the   same   was   verified.     In   fact   the
accused had not disputed that Sunil had  purchased a document
from Bhopal on 11.1.99.    I have  seen the programme telecast
by India TV.   A perusal of that interview would show   that the
interviewer   is   almost     putting   the   words   in   the   mouth   of
Gaurishanker to say that on the date of offence, Sunil Kulkarni
was   in     Mumbai.     Though   Gaurishanker   is   unambiguous   in
saying that Sunil Kulkarni was   a cheat but he is hesitant to state
that on the day of  offence, Sunil Kulkarni was in Mumbai.  The
proved fact  that on 9.1.99 up to 12.30 am  Sunil Kulkarni was in
Delhi and on 11.1.99, he was in Bhopal supports his testimony
that in the morning of 10th, corroborates   his testimony that in
the   early   hours   of   morning,   Sunil   Kulkarni   was   very   much   in
Delhi.
Now,   this   court   is   to   see   as   to   whether   he   had   seen   the
incident himself.  This witness has  testified that when he came to
the police, he met SHO   Lodhi Colony, police asked him to give
his   version   in   writing.     The   description   of   the   incident   in   his
application   to   SHO   matches   the   scene   of   crime.     Though   the
value of this letter   is that of statement U/S 161
CrPC
but the
conduct of a witness  in coming to police and  giving the detail of
of   the   incident   corroborates   the   prosecution   case     that     this
witness had himself  seen the incident.  It appears that police was
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       58
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




initially   doubtful   and   therefore   police   produced   this   witness
before   Sh   Raj   Kumar   Chauhan,   the   then   Ld   Metropolitan
Magistrate who recorded  the statement of Sunil Kulkarni   U/S
164
CrPC
.     The   testimony   of   this   witness   before   this   court   is
substantially consistent with his previous statements as well as it
matches the description of scene of crime mentioned in the rukka
as well as in the site plan.   But as a Judge, I was looking for
further   corroboration   so   as   to   determine   as   to   whether   this
witness had actually seen the accident himself.  The testimony of
this witness was   read time and again and I have   perused   his
testimony very carefully by comparing the same with the site plan
and scene of crime as appearing in videography .   This witness
hs   testified   that   after   hitting   the   persons,   the   vehicle   struck
against the   middle divider and there this vehicle stopped.   It is
pertinent to note that PW Manoj Tiwari has also testified that the
offending vehicle   had stopped after some distance.   Therefore,
the testimony of  Sunil Kulkarni is corroborated  by the testimony
of   another   witness   namely   PW2     Manoj   Tiwari.   This   witness
further  testified  that all the occupants  of the vehicle came   out
of the car and inspected the car from   front side and the back
side.    One  of  the   occupants  stated     accused  Sanjeev  Nanda  to
rush.   It is pertinent to note that   this is only witness who
testified before the court for the first time that thereafter the
vehicle was driven back and then it sped away.   The fact   of
reversing the vehicle was not stated to the police by any of the
witnesses.  In fact even in his statement under
Section 164
CrPC,
this witness has not stated the fact of reversing the vehicle.  The
fact of reversing the vehicle came to the light for the first time in
the testimony of Sunil Kulkarni and the same was not brought to
light   by   any   witness   either   during   investigation   or   during   the
trial.
In the site plan as well as in the rukka, police did not note
down   a   very   particular   fact     which   could   have   shown   that
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       59
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




actually the vehicle had been reversed.   The Investigating Officer
due to oversight has not shown the tyre marks caused   by the
blood     which   show   that     vehicle   had   been     reversed.       But   a
careful perusal   of the videography would show     this   evidence
very clear.   IN fact   during the arguments, Ld defence counsels
have   pointed   out   as   to   how   blood   stained   tyre   mark   going
obliquely towards the middle  divider  is seen.  The defence tried
to   take  the  advantage  of  this  tyre  mark  as  that  of  some  other
vehicle which disturbed the scene of crime and threw the dead
bodies at a long distances.  If we view the videography, there is a
blood spread on the road near point B as shown in the site plan.
This point is near electric pole no.11 as is clear from the site plan.
This electric pole would also been seen in the videography.   At
this point a lot of blood is lying.  One bloody tyre mark obliquely
goes upto the pool of blood but it stops there and does not cross
the pool of blood.  A careful perusal of this bloody tyre marks in
the videography would show that it is the blood marks caused by
a   tyre   of   a   vehicle   which   was   reversed   and   thereafter   it   was
driven straight.
This portion of the videopgrahy leads to an inference that
first   the   vehicle   hit   the   middle   divider   while   someone   was
entangled underneath the car.   The   oblique bloody tyre marks
could   have   been   received   when   the   vehicle   was  reversed   back
and thereafter the three parallel blood are seen when the vehicle
sped away.  The evidence of Sunil Kulkarni that the vehicle was
reversed     and   sped   away   while   the   dead   bodies   were   lying
underneath bonnet of the car is well corroborated by this above
stated   portion   of   videography.     Till   the   appearance   of   Sunil
Kulkarni before this court, none of the witnesses including Sunil
Kulkarni himself had stated that the vehicle had been reversed
after   it   was   inspected   by   its   occupants.     Furthermore,   the
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       60
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




Investigating Officer remained oblivious to this oblique blood tyre
marks   and   the   Investigating   Officer   did   not   mention   this   fact
about this   particular blood trail anywhere in the investigation.
But   this   witness   mentioned   this   fact   very   categorically   in   the
court and the same stands duly corroborated by the videography
scene   of   crime.     In   view   of   this   very   specific   and   well
corroborated evidence of Sunil Kulkarni   I am left in no doubt
that he could not have testified  in this  manner unless he himself
had seen the offence.  I may point out that in the statenment U/S
161
CrPC
Manoj Tiwari and Harishanker , there is no mention of
reversing   the   vehicle.         The   oblique   bloody   tyre   mark   in   the
videography   has  no  other  explanation  except   the  one  which   is
offered by Sunil Kulkarni.  In fact, Ld defence counsels have tried
to take advantage of this blood trail by arguing that some other
vehicle had disturbed the scene of crime, which to my mind has
no basis.
I am of the opinion that accident took place  at about 4.30
am and police reached at about 5 am.    The traffic at that time
could not have been much   and it should not be   expected that
everyone drives   vehicle in such rash and negligent manner.   In
fact, even the witnesses who had been won over by the accused
persons have not testified that some other vehicle  ran over these
or   disturbed   the   scene   of  crime.     Therefore,   the   witness   Sunil
Kulkarni has testified before this court on such a material point
which had been ignored by all the witnesses and the Investigating
Officers.     In   fact,   even   Ld   defence   counsels   were   not   able   to
understand how this blood tyre mark appears near the   middle
divider.     In   these   circumstances   it   stands   proved   beyond
reasonable doubt   that Sunil Kulkarni is an eye witness to the
offence.     I have already discussed that prosecution has proved
beyond   reasonable   doubt   that   accused   Sanjeev   Nanda   was
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       61
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




driving the vehicle .  It is neither  a case of prosecution nor case
of accused Sanjeev Nanda that the vehicle was   being driven at
the   time   of   the   offence   by   Sidharth   Gupta   or   accused   Manik
Kapur or  any other  occupants.     Therefore  a  stray statement of
Sunil   Kulkarni  wherein  he  has  stated   that   Sidharth   Gupta  had
come   out   of   the   driver   seat   should   be   ignored.     Even   if   this
statement is taken to be true, it does not lead to an inference that
Sidharth   Gupta   was   driving   the   vehicle   at     any   stage   of   the
incident. Now this court is to see as to what is testified by witness
Sunil Kulkarni in his evidence.
Sunil Kulkarni was summoned by this court under
Section
311
CrPC.  He had been dropped by the prosecution but since his
statement under
Section 164
CrPC was very much on judicial file,
and the two eye witnesses namely PW1 Hari Shanker Yadav and
PW2 Manoj Malik have turned hostile, I thought it appropriate to
summon Sunil Kulkarni as a court witness.   In his evidence he
testified that when he reached near the place of incident, he saw
a group of people who were standing a bit in the middle of the
road.  From his opposite direction on the road very heavy lights
of a vehicle were seen by him.  The lights were so powerful that
he could not see much.  The said vehicle was a black car and it
hit those people standing on the road.   When the car hit those
people a few persons flew in the air and remaining fell on the
side of the car.  The witness heard the sound of application of
brakes   and   thereafter   he   heard   another   sound   caused   by
hitting by the car.
The three persons came out of the said car
and they saw the damages on the car.   Thereafter all the three
persons sat in the car and the car was taken a bit reverse and
thereafter   took   away   the   car   with   speed.     This   witness  was
cross examined by Sh. I. U. Khan the then Public Prosecutor for
State on 29.5.2007.    It  appears that for the prosecution, Sunil
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       62
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




Kulkarni was still an unreliable witness.   I am leaving out this
portion of the examination at present and directly come to the
cross examination of the witness by Sh. Rajeev Mohan the new
Public   Prosecutor.     The   change   of   public   prosecutor   was
occasioned   by   the   relay   of  a   sting   operation   by   The   NDTV   on
30.5.2007 i.e. One day after 29.5.2007 on which the witness was
cross   examined   by   Sh.   I.   U.   Khan   the   then   Special   Public
Prosecutor.     In   this   telecast   the   Special   Public   Prosecutor   and
defence   counsel   Sh.   R.   K.   Anand   were   shown   influencing   the
witness Sunil Kulkarni.  While assessing the testimony of Sunil
Kulkarni it must be kept in mind that he was facing a public
prosecutor   who   was   acting   in   collusion   with   the   defence
counsel.  The recent judgement of High Court of Delhi in WP
(CRL.)   NO.   796/2007   pronounced   on   21.8.2008   is   an   eye
opener   in   respect   of   the   conduct   of   the   special   public
prosecutor   and   the   defence   counsel,   both   of   whom   were
senior advocates in the present case.   Therefore the witness
was   clearly   under   great   mental   pressure   at   the   time   of
recording   of   his   evidence.     Hence   the   contradictions   and
improvements  on the  periphery  appearing  in  his testimony
should be seen in that light.
The   witness   was   further   put   to   cross   examination   by   Sh.
Rajeev   Mohan   Ld.   Special   Public   Prosecutor   and   in   this   cross
examination the witness gave a detailed testimony.   He testified
that 5 or 6 persons were standing near the tree towards Hudco
Building.     The   vehicle   which   was   coming   from   the   side   of
Nizamuddin hit those 6 persons.  The vehicle was at a very very
high speed.  Due to impact of the accident, 2 or 3 persons fell on
the bonnet and wind screen of the car.   Sh. Rajeev Mohan Ld.
Special Public Prosecutor spread the scaled site plan in the court
and the witness testified with reference to the said site plan.  He
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       63
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




testified that the car had hit the persons at point A i.e. on the foot
path   on   the   side   of   petrol   pump.     Witness   testified   that   the
offending vehicle travelled from point A to B in the site plan on
the same speed or even at a higher speed.  This B point is on the
right side of the road if we come from Nizamuddin side.   The
witness   further   testified   that   while   the   offending   vehicle   was
proceedings from point A to B, 2 or 3 persons were still on the
bonnet of the car and in this process 2 or 3 persons fell down and
rolled down from the bonnet, were dragged and were crushed by
the   car   upto   point   B.     All   this   happened   within   fraction   of
seconds.   The   persons   who   were   hit   were   crying   and   shouting.
After hitting at point B which a point at middle divider of the
road,   the   offending   vehicle   had   friction   with   divider   to   some
distance and stopped.  The witness testified that all the occupants
of the car came out and inspected the car by seeing it from front
side as well from the back side.   When these occupants were
seeing   the   car,   some   persons   were   entangled   under   the
bonnet of the car.  The witness testified that one occupant told
"let   us   rush"   and   thereafter   first   the   vehicle   was   taken   in
reverse direction and thereafter it was driven away at a high
speed.  The witness also stated that due to this accident the wind
screen of the car had become opaque and thereafter the driver
took out his neck from driver side window and drove it away.
The witness also admitted on a suggestion that when the vehicle
was driven away from point B in the site plan,  it dragged the
persons entangled under the vehicle and crushed the same and
went away leaving the parts of the body and these parts of the
body and dead bodies had fallen on the road towards flow of the
traffic and the luggage of all those 6 persons had scattered on the
road.  This witness admitted in cross examination by Ld. Defence
Counsels that he had not stated the colour of the car as black in
his statement under
Section 161
CrPC and 164
CrPC
.
He also
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       64
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




admitted that he has stated in his statement under
Section 164
CrPC that he had seen the incident from the distance of 300 feet.
Whereas in testimony before this court he had stated that he was
at the distance of 60 feet.   The witness explained that now he
could not say as to whether he saw the incident from 300 feet or
60 feet.  The witness strongly denied the suggestion that on the
date and time of the offence he was not present at the spot.  He
denied that on the date of offence he was with Gauri Shanker
Yadav in Mumbai.
This witness has given vivid account as to how the shocking
incident took place.   Whereas his statement under
Section 161
CrPC  as well  as his  statement  under
Section 164
CrPC   do  not
mention that the vehicle was reversed back thereafter it was sped
away   and   that   the   offending   car   was   of   black   colour   but   his
testimony before this court was more detailed than his previous
statement.  Non mentioning of colour in his previous statement is
of no consequence being not material but question is whether his
testimony   that   the   vehicle   was   reversed   is   a   deliberate
improvement amounting to contradiction or it is a true account of
the incident.  As a matter of experience it is seen that a witness
testifies   about   any   incident   in   greater   details   before   the   court.
The   witness   is   testifying   before   this   court   that   car   was   first
reversed and thereafter it was sped away.   In cross examination
by Sh. Ramesh Gupta, adv.
for accused Sanjeev Nanda, he has
testified   that  he  had  seen  the  tyre  marks due  to passing   of
tyres on the blood.   The witness also admits that these tyre
marks were proceeding straight as well as towards the right
side.    This   suggestion   of   Ld.   Defence   Counsel   is   in   respect   of
blood   tyre   marks/blood   trails   going   seen   towards   the   middle
divider   on   the   right   side   of   the   road   if   we   proceed   from
Nizamuddin fly over towards Dyal Singh College.  I have already
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       65
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




discussed how the oblique tyre marks could have come.  This fact
that the vehicle was reversed is in exclusive knowledge of Sunil
Kulkarni and the videography of the scene of crime which show
an oblique blood tyre mark as well as three straight bloody drag
marks   on  the  road   fully  prove  the  testimony  of  Sunil  Kulkarni
that the vehicle was taken a bit reverse and thereafter sped away
while the few persons were still under the bonnet of the car.  This
is how the entangled persons were dragged and had fallen one by
one on the road.
Therefore appraisal of the testimony of PW Sunil Kulkarni
would   show   that   he   is   telling   the   same   story   which   is   being
spoken by the scene of crime.
Therefore   not   only   the   testimony   of   Sunil   Kulkarni   in
respect of as to how the offence took place is worthy of credence
but the same is also well corroborated by the scene of crime.
WHAT OFFENCE DISCLOSED FROM THE TESTIMONY
OF SUNIL KULKARNI

      Ld.   Defence   Counsel   have   vehemently   argued   that   even
from   the   testimony   of   Sunil   Kulkarni,   at   the   most   an   offence
under
Section 304A
IPC would be disclosed.  On the other hand
Ld.   APP   argues   that   the   travel   of   the   offending   car   from
Nizamuddin   area   and   till   hitting   the   person   at   point   A   and
thereafter   reaching   upto   point   B   amounts   an   offence   under
Section 304 (Part II)
IPC
but when the car stopped at point B and
the accused saw the persons entangled beneath the bonnet who
were shouting and crying, still he drove the vehicle at high speed.
This witness is enough to prove that accused Sanjeev Nanda had
caused   death   by  causing  such   bodily  injuries  with   intention   to
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       66
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




cause death and thereby he has committed offence under Section
304 (Part I)
IPC
.
I   disagree   with   the   submissions   of   Ld.   APP.     It   is   a   well
settled law the inference as to whether an accused has intention
to   commit   an   offence   or   he   had   a   knowledge   about   the
consequences, has to be gathered from the circumstances.   The
following   definition   in  Salmond   On   Jurisprudence  is
reproduced as under :
"Intention is the purpose or
                     designed   with   which   an   act   is
                     done.   It is the fore­knowledge
                     of the act and desire being the
                     cause of the act, in as much as
                     they   fulfill   themselves   through
                     the operation of the will. An act
                     is intentional if, and in was far
                     as,   it   exists   in   fact,   the   idea
                     realizing   itself   in   the   fact
                     because of the desire by which it
                     is accompanied."
To   put   it   simply,   knowledge   of   the   consequence   coupled
with the desire to reach those consequences forms the substratum
of intention.   In other words, a combined force of knowledge
of as well as desire  for a particular  consequence  would be
termed as "intention".  Now this courts is to see as to whether
the accused Sanjeev Nanda had the requisite intention to commit
the offence or not.
For this purpose testimony of Sunil Kulkarni will have to be
read   again.
In   the   testimony   Sunil   Kulkarni   has   testified   that
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       67
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




when the vehicle hit the middle divider at point B, the occupants
of the car came out and inspected the damage.   I have already
held that the accused Sanjeev Nanda himself was the driver of
the  offending vehicle  and even  if his wind screen had  become
opaque due to falling of the injured persons,  In this process it is
not possible that accused Sanjeev Nanda should not have seen
the persons who are entangled under the bonnet of the car, at
least when the car stopped at point B near electric pole no.11 and
when he came out and inspected the vehicle from back side as
well as from the front side.  The witness has testified that injured
persons were also crying.   This is another reason that accused
Sanjeev   Nanda   must   have   known   that   a   few   persons   are
entangled under the bonnet of his vehicle.  But I would disagree
with   Ld.   APP   that   accused   Sanjeev   Nanda  intentionally  drove
away the vehicle  by causing such bodily injury as is likely to
cause   death  of   the   persons   so   entangled.    This   portion   of
Section 304(1)
IPC corresponds to second part of
section 299
IPC.   The "intention" is the necessary ingredient of this section.
As per the testimony of Sunil Kulkarni, when the occupants of the
car   started   roaming   around   the   car   to   check   it,   one   of   the
occupants told Sanjeev "let us run" or "Sanz let us go".  It appears
that these words triggered the response in the mind of accused
Sanjeev   Nanda   to   escape   away   from   the   spot.     Thereafter
although accused Sanjeev Nanda knew that a few persons were
entangled under the bonnet because he himself had seen them
while they fell on the bonnet and thereafter came underneath the
car   as   well   as   when   Sanjeev   Nanda   inspected   the   car   after
roaming around it, the act of driving away the car was actually
intended to escape away from the spot.   Otherwise also there is
no   reason   why   he   would  desire  to   kill   the   persons  who  were
already   injured.
Therefore   I   am   of  the   opinion   that   from   the
circumstances attending the event at that particular time it does
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       68
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




not appear to me that accused Sanjeev Nanda could have desired
to cause death of these persons. In fact, accused Sanjeev Nanda
must have been in a state of shock and panic therefore he acted
on being actuated by his co accused and sped away his car.  This
particular   testimony   of   Sunil   Kulkarni   rules   out   the   intention
requisite   for
Section   304(1)
IPC.   As   seen   as   I   have   already
discussed that intention has two prominent features.  First is the
knowledge  of   the   consequence   and   second,   a  desire  for   the
consequence.     As   soon   as   the   element   of  desire  for   the
consequences goes, the mental state of an accused falls short of
intention  and the court is left with the only option to attribute
knowledge to accused Sanjeev Nanda.
When comes the question of knowledge, the inquiry would
start revolving around
Section 300(4)
IPC, part III of
Section 299
IPC and
Section 304A
IPC.
There is no charge of
Section 300(4)
IPC read with
Section
302
IPC but still I would like to discuss this a little bit.   As per
Section   300(4)
IPC,   culpable   homicide   is   murder   if   the   actor
knows that  it is so eminently dangerous that it must, in all
probability, cause death or such bodily injury as is likely to
cause death.
When some persons are entangled under the bonnet and the
vehicle is driven at a very high speed, the act is so imminently
dangerous   that   it   would   cause   death   in   all   probability.     Since
relevant   charge   has   not   been   framed,   I   would   only   hold   that
although the offence is almost touching the borders of
Section
300(4)
IPC   but   has   not   fully   arrived   at   it.     Once   that   is   the
situation, the offence would fall back to Section 299 (part III)
IPC
punishable   under   Section   304   (part   II)
IPC
.     As   soon   as   the
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       69
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




gravity of the offence is of such a nature that it is touching the
borders   of   the   offence   of   murder,   it   would   be   absolutely
unreasonable to bring the offence within the definition of
Section
304A
IPC.
Ld. Defence Counsels as well as Ld. Prosecutor have
referred  to   a  judgement  Regina  Vs. Maloney  [1985]  AII E.R.
1025  and   both   the   parties   have   relied   upon   this   English
judgement in their favour.   After perusing the said judgement, I
am   of   the   opinion   that   in   India   these   facts   would   fall   under
Section 300(4)
IPC or third part of
Section 299
IPC and in no
manner the same would fall under
Section 304A
IPC.
My discussions in this regard about the circumstances and
evidence on record in earlier part of the evidence as well as the
testimony   of   accused   Sunil   Kulkarni   cumulatively   leads   to
proving it a case under Section 304 (part II)
IPC
and I convict
accused Sanjeev Nanda accordingly.
DESTRUCTION OF EVIDENCE

      The prosecution alleges that accused Sanjeev Nanda parked
his vehicle at 50  Golf Link after committing the offence.   It is
alleged by the prosecution that accused Rajeev Gupta and his two
servants namely accused Shyam Singh and accused Bhola Nath
washed the car and destroyed the material evidence which was
present on the car in form of blood, flash pieces and finger prints.
Ld. Defence Counsel have drawn my attention to the definition of
Section 201
IPC.
Sh. G. P. Thareja, adv. argued that the first ingredient of
this offence is that the accused should  have reasons to know
that an offence has been committed.  It is argued by Ld. Defence
Counsel that there is no evidence to show that accused persons
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       70
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




had   knowledge   or   reason   to   know   that   the   offence   has   been
committed.   It is argued that at the most they found a damage
vehicle parked in their house upon which flesh pieces and blood
stains were present.   A vehicle can be damaged and it can have
blood and flesh pieces due to an accident with animal also.  It is
argued   that   presence   of   stray   animal   on   Delhi   roads   is   not
uncommon.  Therefore at the most the evidence on record is that
accused had the knowledge of an accident.  It is argued by Sh. G.
P. Thareja, adv. that committing an accident is no offence.  I have
considered   the   submissions   of  Ld.   Defence   counsel  and   I   most
humbly  disagree   with   the   submissions  of  Ld.   Defence  Counsel.
Section   201
starts   with   word  "whoever,   knowing   or   having
reasons to believe that an offence has been committed........."
It means that prosecution need not to prove that it was brought
to the knowledge of an accused by someone that an offence has
been committed.   The ingredients of the offence would be fully
satisfied if prosecution is able to show that a particular accused
was having the reasons to believe that an offence has been
committed.  In the present case the vehicle was badly damaged.
Blood stains and flash was available on the vehicle.   In fact the
finger prints were also available.  In such a situation man would
have the reasons to believe that some human being might also
have been killed by the present vehicle, though it may later on
turn   out  that  it   was  simply   an  accident.     It   is  not  the   case   of
accused Rajeev Gupta, Bhola Nath and Shyam Singh that accused
Sanjeev Nanda and Manik Kapur and Sidharth Gupta, who is the
son of Rajeev Gupta had simply stated to them that their vehicle
had hit stray animal.   In such a situation I am convinced that
accused   persons   have   reasons   to   believe   that   some   criminal
offence involving death of human beings had taken place.  I may
point out that Sidharth Gupta is the son of Rajeev Gupta himself.
He   was   the   best   persons   to   be   brought   as   defence   witness   by
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       71
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




accused persons to prove as to what had been stated by Sidharth
Gupta, Sanjeev Nanda and Manik Kapur as to how the vehicle
was damaged and why it is having blood stains and flesh pieces.
I   may   point   out   that   Sidharth   Gupta   has   been   arrayed   as   an
accused,   but   later   on   was   discharged,   but   Sunil   Kulkarni   has
testified that he was one of the occupants of the car.
In AIR 1975, SC 1703, Gajender Singh Vs State of UP, the
Supreme Court held that if a witness is available to an accused
and he does not produce him, the same is the strongest possible
circumstance to discredit the defence version.
I   may  point  out  that   there   has  been    a  special    effort   to
destroy the evidence.  Inspector Jagdish Pandey has testified  in
his   evidence   that   the   backside   number   plate   of   BMW   car   was
missing .  A perusal of videography would also show that on the
back side  of the BMW car, the number plate was not visible.  The
front side number plate had fallen on the road at the time of the
hitting   the   vehicle   with   the   unfortunate   persons.     The
videography  would show that the  back side  no. plate of the car
is missing.  The  space for back side number plate of the back car
is such that it does not show any damage.  Therefore  in fact it is
not possible  that it could have  been hit and  got damaged due to
accident.   The fact that non visibility of the number plate is an
indicator that  effort was made to remove a number plate so that
no one can identify the number of the car.   I make it clear that
charge     for   removing   the   number   plate   has   not   been   framed.
Therefore conviction cannot be placed on record   for   removing
the   number   plate   but   these   circumstances   can   be   taken   in
consideration   to   assess   as   to   what   was   the   intention   of   the
accused persons.
SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       72
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




        It     is   not   in   dispute   that   accused   Shyam   Singh   was   a
chowkidar   in   50   Golf   Links   at   that   time.       Who   removed   this
number plate   is in special knowledge of this man.   SI   Jagdish
Pandey testified that   when he reached 50 Golf Link, the water
was coming out of that house.     The videography would show
that the  floor/ pathway  where the car was parked appears to be
washed.   The Finger Proficient who came at about 10 am also
testified that the car was wet.   The accused persons as well as
the defence witness namely DW9 Sudhir Sareen have stated that
the   car   was   not   washed.     In   view   of   the   presence   of   positive
evidence   ie   the   testimonies  of  the   witnesses  and   the   wet  floor
where car was parked, the testimonies of the defence witnesses
and the statement of accused persons
u/s 313
CrPC on this point
stand falsified.  This  falsity of defence is an additional reason to
support   the   prosecution   case   and   it   serves   not   only   a
corroboration to the prosecution case  but also fills up the missing
chain   of   circumstances   against   all   the   accused   namely   Rajeev
Gupta, Shyam Singh and Bholanath.   I refer to the judgment of
Supreme Court Swapan Patra v. State of West Bengal, (1999)
9 SCC 242, Supreme Court said that in a case of circumstantial
evidence   when   the   accused   offers   an   explanation   and   that
explanation   is   found   not   to   be   true   then   the   same   offers   an
additional   link   in   the   chain   of   circumstances   to   complete   the
chain.
The same principle has been followed and reiterated in
State of Maharashtra vs. Suresh
, (2001) 1 SCC 471, where it
has been said that a false answer offered by the accused when his
attention was drawn to a circumstance, renders that circumstance
capable of inculpating him.   Supreme Court has further held in
this   case   that  in   such   a   situation   false   answer   can   also   be
counted as providing a missing link for completing the chain.
The aforesaid principle has been again followed and reiterated in
Kuldeep  Singh  and  others   vs.  State   of   Rajasthan
,   2000  (5)
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       73
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




(SC) 161.
In Anthony D'Souza vs.State of Karnataka 2003 CRI. L. J.
434, The full Bench of Supreme Court consisting of Hon'ble R. C.
Lahoti, Brijesh Kumar and H. K. Sema, JJ. opined in para 15 as
under :
"By now it is well established principle of law that in a
case of circumstantial evidence where an accused offers false
answer in his examination under 313 against the established
facts   that   can   be   counted   as   providing   a   missing   link   for
completing the chain".
I   may   point   out   that   DW9   Sudhir   Sareen   examined   by
Rajeev Gupta are very categorical in stating that the car was   not
washed.     None   of   these   witnesses   and   none   of   these   accused
persons     have   explained     as   to   how   the     floor   on   which   the
vehicle is parked   is seen wet in videography.   In statement
u/s
313
CrPC  accused  Rajeev Gupta  has stated  that  false  evidence
was   fabricated   against   them   at   the   instance   of   senior   police
officials.   Similarly accused Shyam Singh and Bhola Nath have
testified   that   police   had   involved   them   due   to   vested   interest.
However, no reason has been shown as to why  police would do
so.
Ld   defence   counsels     have   drawn   my   attention   to   the
contradictions   in   the   statement   of   the   witnesses.     It   is   argued
that in their statements
u/s 161
CrPC, witness Jagdish Pandey ,
Inspector Vimlesh Yadav the SHO  Lodhi Colony  and SI  Kailash
Chand the initial Investigating Officer  have nowhere stated that
they   had   seen   accused   Rajeev   Gupta,   Shyam   Singh   and   Bhola
Nath washing the car.  It is argued   by  Ld defence counsels that
supplementary statement U/S 161
CrPC
of these witnesses were
recorded on 30.3.99 ie after about 3 months from the incident.
SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       74
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008
Ld defence counsels have referred to the case law of Delhi High
court that  statement U/S 161
CrPC
recorded after a long time is
unworthy of credence.
I am of the opinion that a mechanical view cannot be taken
that if a  supplementary statement is recorded subsequently, the
same becomes unworthy of credence.   In fact the court is not to
see whether   statement U/S 161
CrPC
is unworthy of credence,
rather the court is to consider as to whether the testimony made
by a witness in the court is trustworthy or unworthy of credence.
In assessing the testimony of witness in court, the supplementary
statement recorded U/S 161
CrPC
of of a witness after a   long
time, is only one factor to be taken in consideration.   However,
the court would not throw away the legally admissible evidence
of truthful witness only on account of this reason.   I may point
out that   in AIR   1986  Supreme court  990, the supreme Court
did not discard the statement of main eye witness only on the
ground that the same was recorded   by the police after  56 days
of the incident.
In fact each case has to be   judged in the   backdrop of its
own peculiar features.    I have already stated  that this particular
case is one of those cases which highlights the degradation which
has   crept   into   the   criminal   justice   system.     Conduct   of   the
investigating agency is also under shadow of doubt.   A careful
perusal of the entire investigation and the case diaries  as well as
the   judicial   record,   it   would     become   abundantly   clear   that
although   initially   the   police   acted   with   a   great   responsiveness
which is  expected from a law enforcing agency.  But very soon a
great  deal of reluctance on the part of the investigating  officer
starts appearing in the case.   Though   from outward, it was a
show of strength and determination   but the silent termites had
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       75
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




started eating the wood from in side.  The accused persons have
examined one Karan Gaurav as DW5.  In cross examination by Ld
Special Public Prosecutor, he admitted  that he was   a son  of a
former     Commissioner   of   Police.     He   testified   that   he     had
reached  50 Golf Links at about 8.30 or 9 am.  Does it indicate as
to why police suddenly developed cold feet and indulged into  a
most   inefficient   investigation   almost   at   every   step     I   am
recounting the facts and placing the same on record.
1.      On   11.1.99     SI     Kailash
                  Chand   moved   an   application
                  before   a                 Metropolitan
                  Magistrate.     The   application   is
                  EXPW58/F.     In   this   application,
                  SI     Kailash   Chand   has     written
                  two   facts.     First,   accused   Rajeev
                  Gupta,   Bhola   Nath   and   Shyam
                  Singh     washed   the   vehicle   and
                  secondly destroyed the evidence ie
                  blood   etc.  and   changed     the
                  rear   number   plate   of   the
                  vehicle     BMW   so   that   the
                  vehicle   cannot   be   identified.
But   this   was   only   an   outward
                  show   that   they   won't   spare
                  anyone but on the other hand the
                  Investigating   Officer     SI   Kailash
                  Chand did not record anything to
                  this effect in the statement under
Section 161
CrPC.  I point out to
                  the   statement   of   SHO     Vimlesh
                  Yadav   that   she   had   stated   this
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       76
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




                         fact   to   the   Investigating   Officer
                         but he did not record it.
2.     A   notice   U/s   133
Motor
                         Vehicle   Act
was   given   to   Sonali
                         Nanda   who   stated   as to who
                         was   driving   the   vehicle   at   the
                         time     when   offence   took   place   .
This   Kalendra   is     EXPW60/5
issued   by     SI     Ulhas   Giri.
However,   Ms   Sonali     Nanda
                         refused to accept this notice and
                         even declined to place service on
                         the   notice.     Thereafter   on
                         11.1.99   again, the Investigating
                         Officer   gave   a   notice   U/S   133
Motor   Vehicle   Act
but   still
                         Sonali Nanda refused to take the
                         said notice.   However, no action
                         was taken    against   her.        It  is
                         pertinent to note that for refusing
                         to   cooperate     with   the
                         investigation, she could have been
                         prosecuted   under   various
                         provisions of
Indian Penal Code
.
However, the Investigating officer
                         did not proceed in this direction.
This   is   interesting   to   note   that
                         the charge sheet was prepared by
                         SHO on 25.3.99 and till then no
                         action   had   been   taken   against
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       77
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




                         her.         On   the   objection   of   the
                         prosecution,   one   Kalendra   U/S
                         5/181   and   133/179
Motor
                         Vehicle   Act
which   is   punishable
                         only   with   minor   fine   was
                         prepared   on     2.4.99.     Further
                         more,   instead   of   prosecuting   the
                         said   kalendra   separately   in   the
                         court   of     Magistrate,   it   was
                         annexed   with   the   main   challan
                         without referring Sonia Nanda as
                         an   accused   in   the   main   charge
                         sheet.    To my mind, this was an
                         offence  where    she    should have
                         been prosecuted U/S 179
Indian
                         Penal   Code
which   provide
                         imprisonment up to six months if
                         a person   refuses to answer   any
                         question  to a public servant who
                         is   authorized   to   ask   such
                         question.
3.     It   would   be   interesting   to
                         note   what   kind   of   charge   sheet
                         has been filed in the present case
                         which is being monitored by the
                         senior   officers   of   the   police
                         department.     The   charge   sheet
                         which   was   prepared   on   25.3.99
                         does not even mention as to what
                         act   was   done   by   Bhola   Nath,
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       78
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




                         Shyam Singh and Rajeev Gupta.
The   charge   sheet   simply   writes
                         that   there   is   sufficient   material
                         against   them   U/s   201/34
IPC
.
It   is   interesting   to   note   that   in
                         the   charge   sheet   there   is   no
                         mention of missing number plate
                         of   the   back   side   of   BMW   car,
                         although   it   has   been   mentioned
                         in   the   application   for   police
                         remand Ex.PW58/F.  It has been
                         specifically   mentioned   that
                         accused   Rajeev   Gupta,   Bhola
                         Nath   and   Shyam   Singh   washed
                         the   vehicle   and   destroyed   the
                         evidence   i.e.   blood   etc.  and   the
                         changed the rear number plate
                         of vehicle BMW so that vehicle
                         cannot be identified.   But when
                         the charge sheet was filed, there
                         was no mention of changing the
                         rear   number   plate.     In   evidence
                         also,  only one  fact  has come  on
                         record that the rear number plate
                         was   missing.     I   was   constrained
                         to read the case diaries and from
                         the case diary  dated 10.1.99, it
                         is revealed that in fact one of the
                         accused   had   taken   out   the   back
                         side number plate of the car and
                         thereafter re­fixed it at the proper
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       79
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




                         slot   in   such   a   manner   that   the
                         back side of the number plate is
                         visible to a looker and the side on
                         which   the   number   is   written   is
                         concealed because the said side is
                         now touching the body of the car.
This evidence being a part of case
                         diary cannot be read in evidence
                         but   it   does   not   need   great
                         imagination to understand as to
                         why   this   piece   of   evidence   was
                         not put forth by the investigation
                         and   the   prosecution.       I   may
                         stress here that this type of state
                         of affair in the police department
                         has   become   quite   common
                         wherever   influential   persons   are
                         arraigned as an accused.   I have
                         no doubt about it that this is not
                         simply a negligence but deliberate
                         tactics.
4.     This reluctance of the police
                         officials     further   appears   even
                         during   trial.     One   application
                         was   moved   during   trial   by   the
                         prosecution to direct  the accused
                         Sanjeev Nanda to give his blood
                         sample.     I left this aspect to be
                         investigated   by   the   police   and
                         directed   them   to   exercise   their
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       80
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




                         powers   U/S   173   (8)
CrPC
.   In
                         recent   amendment,   police     have
                         got the power to use   reasonable
                         force against an accused to take
                         his  blood   sample.     Police   simply
                         sent  a   notice  to  accused  Sanjeev
                         Nanda   who   refused   to   give   the
                         blood   sample.     At   that   time   the
                         prosecution   insisted   that   court
                         should   use   its   own   powers   and
                         direct accused   Sanjeev Nanda to
                         give the blood sample.  I take this
                         opportunity to explain as to why,
                         despite   being   empowered   to
                         direct, the accused Sanjeev Nanda
                         to   give   blood   sample,   I   did   not
                         pass any specific order  rather  it
                         left   to   the   police   to   use   its   own
                         powers.    I was just checking the
                         enthusiasm   or   reluctance   of   the
                         police in investigating the case.  It
                         is a different matter that fearing
                         an     adverse   inference   might   not
                         be   made,   accused   himself
                         furnished the blood group report.
There were many other points which  are of minor nature
which I am not inclined to discuss  for sake of brevity.    But after
perusal   of   the   entire   judicial   file   and   police   file,     I   am   of  the
considered opinion that this is simply not  a case of hobnobbing
between defence counsel  and prosecution but also  at some stage
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       81
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




in the  back ground, the Investigating Officer has been influenced
who being deliberately indulged in such perfunctory investigation
that it causes serious prejudice to the prosecution.  In background
of   these   circumstances   ,   the   evidence   on   record   has   to   be
assessed.     The   principle   of   weighing   the   evidence   on     golden
scales cannot be applied here because this trial   is an example
where   the   entire   criminal   justice     and     entire   trial   has   been
hijacked by the rich and influential  accused persons.
Once this scenario is emerging, taking  technical view of the
facts and circumstances is bound to lead to miscarriage of justice.
However, there appears to be some ray of hope.  Although while
delivering   Judgment,   the   courts   normally   do   not   refer   to   the
internal   departmental   notings   and   communication   between
Prosecuting  Branch   and   the  Investigating  Officers.     However,   I
would  not refrain  myself to point out that one additional Public
Prosecutor   checked   the   whole   challan   and   raised   serious
objections in the investigation.   It appears that he saw through
the game.   I am not reproducing those objections.    Suffice it to
say that pinched by these objections, the police had no option but
to   prepare   a   Kalendra   against   Sonali   Nanda   (though   it   was
concealed in the main challan).  Police was constrained to record
further statement of the police officials who had   seen accused
Rajeev Gupta , Shyam Singh and Bhola Nath washing the car.
Despite this fact that further investigation was conducted by the
police,   no   fresh   charge   sheet   was   prepared,   rather   the   new
statements were attached with the challan and the charge sheet
was filed in the court.  It is common to see that investigations are
faulty.
It is also common to see that the investigating Officer is
inefficient.     It   is   also   frequently   seen   that   the   Investigating
Officers commit blunders.   But all these are forgivable because
there is no oblique motive.  However this  was a high profile case
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       82
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




and the record shows that the same was being monitored by the
top   police  officers.     Therefore,   such   level  of  inefficiency   is  not
incidental, rather to my mind, the same appears to be deliberate.
In   such   state   of   affair,   the   court   has   only   one   option   ie   to
abandon the narrow and winding lane of technicalities and travel
on the royal  road of justice.
Ld   defence   counsels   have   place   heavy   reliance   on   the
wireless messages.   It is argued by defence counsels that in the
wireless message,   it is not stated by inspector Jagdish Pandey
that he had seen the vehicle being washed.     It is   argued that
even if it is presumed that the vehicle was actually washed, it
appears   from   the   wireless   messages   that   the   police   officials
reached when it had already been washed and therefore it cannot
be said as to  whether they actually had seen the accused persons
washing the said vehicle.     It is argued by Ld defence counsels
that Rajeev Gupta was  sleeping up to 9 am  and at least he could
not have washed the vehicle.  It is further argued by Ld defence
counsels   that it is not possible that Rajeev Gupta is one of the
richest persons of Delhi would himself  wash the vehicle when he
has two servants.
Before   considering   these   submissions,   I   reproduce   the
relevant   wireless   messages.     These   wireless   messages   were
produced   by   the   prosecution   on   the   application   of   Ld   defence
counsels during trial  and I treated these messages to be admitted
documents.   The first message  was flashed   from 6 am to 6.10
am which is reproduced as under :
6.00­E1  T27 char aadmi majrub hein jinhe gari medical lekar
                          gai hei, do ki halat gambhir hei, do hosh mein
hein
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       83
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




Jo T 27 Sahab ke saath moke  ja rahe the to raste se
Hi diesel girta hua gaya tha, jis per hamne peechha karte
Huei 50 no. golf linke per pahunche jo wahan per
Gaari accidental  BMW kale rang  thi Ismein park lane
Ka sticker laga hua tha, jo kothi mein khari mili
Jiske  bare mein darwaja nahin khola  chowkidar se
Poochhtachh ki gai  jiski ittla E1 wa E­2   ko 
Di gai''
                   

      Second   relevant   message   is   flashed   by  T27,   Inspector
Jagdish Pandey at 7.35 am which is reproduced as under:
Date 10.1.99         Time  7.35     CRDD no. 1305
" 50 no. Golf Link per T 27 Accidential 
spot Lodhi hotel se gaari gire huei tel ke
spot ka   peechha karte hue pahuncha jahan ek
accident mein  involved gaari taja dhuli hi wa tirpal se
dhaki hui paai gai wa kuchh aur garia bhi khari hei''

       Third relevant message  is flashed at  7.45 am which is  as
under :
' 'Is samay S­3 wa SHO  Lodhi Colony moke per
Maiy staff aa gaye jinhe gari ke bare mein avgat 
Karaya gaya jo gaari accident  karke bhag gait hi
Jis gaari ko pakar kar SHO  Lodhi Road ke hawale
Ki gai"
These   messages   have   been   heavily   relied   upon   by   Ld
defence   counsels.     While   interpreting   these   wireless   messages,
one thing must be kept in mind.  The process is that an event is
seen by a PCR police official and then   orally conveyed on the
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       84
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




wireless.   The  police control room records the same  verbatim in
their official form/register.   When an offence takes place, there is
flurried activities on part of the police official.  There is always a
possibility of slip of tongue on part of the person giving message.
There is possibility that such person   sending the message may
leave out material details.  There are all the possibilities that the
person     who   is   recording   the   message   in   his   diary/register   or
form may make mistake in writing the message.   This situation is
amply borne out from the fact that in one message by Inspector
Jagdish Pandey, it is stated that an eye witness had told him that
a   red   colour   contessa   had   committed   the   offence.     This
message was conveyed from the PCR T27 at 5.23am.  Therefore
accuracy of these messages  should not be expected.   However, I
would like to read these messages as it is.   The first fact to be
considered is that the first message  which was sent from  50 Golf
Links  by PCR  T27 is at about 6 am.  In this message it is stated
that       at 50 Golf Links, one accidental     BMW car of   black
colour having a sticker of Park lane was found   parked   but
darwaja was not opened.  Inquiry was made from chowkidar.
Reading of this DD entry would show that   at 6.10 am the car
was   not   covered   with   tarpaulin.     It   also   shows   that   the
information   about   the   vehicle   and   the   Park   Lane   sticker   was
received   by   the   police   officials   from   the   chowkidar/   security
guard of that house. The next entry at 7.35 am from   T27. The
message   flashed   by   Inspector   Jagdish   Pandey.    It   gives   the
status of the vehicle  at 7.35 am. This message only means that
the   vehicle   has   been   washed   and     has   been   covered     with
tarpaulin .
Ld defence counsels have pointed out that SHO has reached
at 7.50 am when the vehicle had already been washed and that
how   she   could   have   seen   the   accused   persons   washing   the
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       85
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




vehicle.   Ld defence counsels have pointed out to the message
flashed at 7.50 am in which it is stated that SHO  Lodhi Colony
has reached at the spot.     I am of the opinion   that   Ld defence
counsels  are reading this message at 7.50 am out of context.  In
fact   SHO Lodhi Colony had reached the spot before 7.50 am.
This fact has been mentioned in the message flashed   at 7.45 am
in which it is stated that SHO  Lodhi Colony has reached the spot
with staff and the vehicle had been placed  under her custody.
From the reading of these two DD entries, it would be clear
that  at 6.10 am, there was no tarpaulin on BMW car, whereas at
7.35   am   the   car   was     seen   with   a   tarpaulin.     In   the   message
flashed   at   7.35   am   by   Inspector   Jagdish   Pandey,   it   has   been
mentioned that the vehicle has been washed.  If the vehicle was
covered with tarpaulin at 7.35 am, how Inspector Jagdish Pandey
reached to a conclusion that it has recently been washed ( Taja
Dhuli   Hui)     It   has   only   one   meaning     that   inspector   Jagdish
Pandey had seen that vehicle was being washed and at 7.35 am
he found that the same has also been covered with a tarpaulin.
In   view   of   these   circumstances   I   am   convinced   that
Inspector Jagdish Pandey as well as   SHO   Vimlesh Yadav had
seen the vehicle   being washed.   There is no reason as to why
police officials would     falsely arrest these accused persons.   As
per the defence, police had  even apprehended  Mr Sareen but let
him off.  If the police was so  biased due to death of  a few police
officials, why  it should let go  some persons.   I am of the opinion
that till apprehension of all the accused persons, the investigation
was going on     right track   and is fully credible.       The blemish
started appearing in the investigation thereafter due to obvious
reasons.
SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       86
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008
Therefore I am convinced that accused Rajeev Gupta, Bhola
Nath and Shyam Singh had reasons to believe that an offence has
been committed.   Otherwise there was no reason that the back
side number plate of the BMW car should not visible.  The blood
and   the   flesh   parts   on   the   body   of   the   vehicle   were   material
pieces of evidence to prove that human beings have been killed.
Otherwise there was no reason as to why this car should have
been   washed   by   the   accused   persons.     The   defence   witness
namely Karan Gaurav, Karan Singh and Sudhir  Sareen are not
reliable   being   interested   witnesses   and   due   to   the   reason   that
testimony of DW7 Karan Singh and DW9 Sudhir Sareen stands
unworthy   of   credence   on  account   of  their   false   testimony   that
there   was   no   washing   of   the   car.     Testimony   of   DW5   Gaurav
Karan   is   unworthy   of   reliance   because   it   is   unbelievable   that
when police has reached at 50 Golf Links, the police officials or
the servants of Rajeev Gupta would let him sleeping in his room.
It would be strange that police and servants did not wake him up
till   this   witness   goes   up   stairs   and   wakes   him   up.     In   these
circumstances, I am of the opinion that   prosecution has proved
its   case   beyond   reasonable   doubt   that   accused   Rajeev   Gupta,
Shyam Singh and Bhola Nath were having  reason to believe that
offence has been committed involving BMW car and by washing
the car due to which the blood on the car No.   M­312­LYP was
made   to   disappear,   though   some   blood   and   some   flesh   still
remained on some parts of the car.
Prosecution   has not been able to lead any evidence against
accused   Manik   Kapur   except   his   one   finger   print   on  the   outer
body  of  BMW  car.    This   finger  print  does  not  prove  anything.
Therefore, I acquit accused Manik Kapur.
SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       87
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008
In   view   of   this   discussions,   accused   Sanjeev   Nanda   is
convicted U/S 304 (II)
IPC
.
Accused   Rajeev   Gupta,   Bhola   Nath   and   Shyam   Singh   are
hereby convicted U/s 201 (II)
IPC
.
Announced in open court 
On 2.9.08                                        VINOD KUMAR 
                                     ADDL. SESSIONS JUDGE
                                                 NEW DELHI
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       88
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




                    THE COURT OF SH. VINOD KUMAR
                 ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE, NEW DELHI
Sessions Case No. 25/99
FIR No. 17/99
PS Lodhi Colony
State Vs   1.   Sanjeev Nanda
                S/o Sh. Suresh Nanda
                R/o D­108 Defence Colony, New Delhi.
           2.   Bhola Nath
                S/o Sh. Moti Lal
                R/o 103, Sunder Nagar, New Delhi.
           3.   Shyam Singh Rana
                S/o Sh. Nandan Singh Rana
                R/o 50 Golf Link, New Delhi.
           4.   Rajeev Gupta
                S/o Sh. Ved Parkash Gupta
                R/o 50 Golf Link, New Delhi.

ORDER ON SENTENCE

5.9.2008
Present:        Sh. Rajiv Mohan, Special Public Prosecutor with
                Sh. Naveen Kumar, APP for State.
Convict   Sanjeev   Nanda   from   J.C.   with   counsel   Sh.   Ramesh
Gupta,   adv.,   Prem   Kumar   adv.,   Sh.   Sandeep   Kapur   adv.,   and   Sh.
Mehul Milind adv.
Convict Rajeev Gupta on bail with counsel Sh. S. S. Gandhi Ld.
Senior adv. Along with Sh. Mohit Mathur adv.
Convict Bhola Nath and Shyam Singh on bail with counsel Sh.
G. P. Thareja adv., Sh. Sunil Magan adv., and Sh. J. P. Singh adv.
SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       89
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008
Sh. Rajiv Mohan Ld. Public Prosecutor has prayed for maximum
sentence to the convicts on following grounds :
1. The offence is of very serious nature and in the judgement, it
      has been opined that the offence almost touches the borders of
Section 300(4)
IPC and the such offences are a grave threat to
      the public on roads.
2. A leniency view in fatal accident cases has been deprecated by
      the   Supreme   Court   and   the   present   case   is   a   case   of   higher
      gravity than a fatal accident case.
3. That   the   convict   had   indulged   in   winning   over   the   witnesses
      and have thwarted the course of justice.
On the other hand Sh. Ramesh Gupta, adv. for convict Sanjeev
Nanda has prayed for leniency while sentencing the convicts which
are as follows :
1. The convict was only 19 years of age at the time of offence.
2. That this court has observed in the judgement that the convict
      had no desire to kill those persons.
3. The family of convicts have already paid Rs.10 lacs to the family
      of each deceased and Rs.5 lacs to the injured vide order of the
      High Court after a very short period from the offence.
4. That convict Sanjeev Nanda has no previous conviction.
5. The   jail   record   of   the   convict   during   the   custody   period   had
      been   exemplary.     Ld.   Counsel   has   filed   two   affidavit   of   two
      NGOs   and   has   submitted   that   during   the   custody   period   the
      convict had been actively involved in constructive and creative
      work   and   this   convict   is   an   asset   to   the   society   and   further
      detention in jail would be great loss to the society as well as to
      the family of the convict.
6. Sh. Ramesh Gupta, adv. for convict Sanjeev Nanda has raised a
      strong   objection   to   the   submissions   of   Additional   Public
      Prosecutor   that   convict   is   indulged   in   winning   over   the
      witnesses.     It   is   argued   by   Ld.   Defence   Counsel   that   convict
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       90
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




       Sanjeev   Nanda   had   no   opportunity   during   the   entire   trial   to
       answer this charge and therefore if any attempt has been made
       to win over the witnesses, convict Sanjeev Nanda cannot be held
       liable for it.
7. Sh. Ramesh Gupta, adv. has argued that under
Section 304 (II)
IPC, the court has wide discretion starting from imposition of
       fine only and it may range upto inflicting of sentence upto ten
       years.  Sh. Ramesh Gupta adv. argues that in view of the totality
       of   the   circumstances   the   convict   may   be   released   on
       imprisonment   which   he   has   already   undergone   during   trial
       which come out to be about nine months.
Sh.   Prem   Kumar,adv.   for   convict   Sanjeev   Nanda   has   added
following points :
1. That this court has observed in the judgement that the convict is
      a grand son of a illustrious figure namely Admiral S. M. Nanda,
      who had rendered invaluable service to this Nation.
2. That he had suffered enough on account of over zealous police
      who   booked   him   under
Section   304(1)
IPC   unjustly   and
      thereafter faced persecution by a hostile media.
I have given thoughtful consideration to all the submissions of
Ld.   Defence   Counsels.     The   determination   of   sentence   is   quite   a
difficult   job.     The   best   course   to   determine   the   quantum   of
punishment is to see the "precedence" of a similar case.  To my mind
the nearest case which has come to the notice of this court is
Alister
Anthony   Pareira
's  case   decided   by   Bombay   High   Court.     The   said
case was also a case of drunken driving.  In the said case the car had
run over seven persons sleeping on the footpath and killed them.  In
the said case Pareira was also a young man and he also tried to flee
away   from   the   spot.     The   blood   of   Pareira   was   found   to   contain
0.112%   W/V   Ethyl   alcohol.     In   the   said   case   Bombay   High   Court
awarded a punishment for three years and a fine in the sum of Rs.5
lacs.
If the present case is compared with
Pareira
's case, it would be
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       91
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




found that the case of Sanjeev Nanda is much more graver than the
said case.   Convict Sanjeev Nanda was found with presence of Ethyl
alcohol to the extent of 0.115% in his blood.  Whereas the said case
was on lower end of
Section 304(II)
IPC, whereas in this case, I have
written that the offence is almost touching the border of
Section 300
(4)
IPC.
In
Pareira
's   case   people   were   sleeping   on   the   foot   path,
whereas in this case people were standing on the road which means
that the convict was in a position to clearly see them on the road.
Pareira's car stopped at the spot, whereas Sanjeev Nanda checked the
car   under   which   the   injured   were   entangled   and   were   crying   and
thereafter again drove away the said car.   Therefore it is prayed by
Ld. APP that circumstances require the sentence of higher end.
Now   I   would   see   as   to   whether   the   factors   pointed   out   by
convict   Sanjeev   Nanda   can   be   taken   as   mitigating   fact.     First
argument is that the convict was only 19 years of age at the time of
offence.     Normally   the   young   age   of   a   convict   at   the   time   of
commission   of   offence   is   considered   as   a   factor   towards   granting
leniency in sentence but in case of  Sanjeev Nanda it would not be
applicable.     As   per     statement   under
Section   313
CrPC   dated
19.11.2007, convict Sanjeev Nanda has answered to question no.41
and no.44  by stating that  during those days he used to study in
USA and he had a driving license issued from Boston USA.   This
shows that convict Sanjeev Nanda was already exposed to a Western
culture where drunken driving is taboo and if someone indulges in it
the   consequences   are   very   harsh.     A   person   who   had   got   driving
license from USA can be considered to be having a higher degree of
knowledge of consequences of drunken driving.  Therefore on account
of his young age, no benefit can be given to him.
I do not find any force in the arguments of Ld. Defence Counsels
that convict Sanjeev Nanda was unjustly implicated under
Section 304
(1)
IPC.
In fact it is not uncommon that the drivers of the motor
vehicles specially with criminal background hit the police officials on
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       92
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




checking   duty   deliberately   and   have   even   killed   them.     Therefore
when the police found a few police officers lying dead at the spot, the
police   had   just   reasons   to   register   a   case   for   intentionally   causing
deaths.
The   grant   of   handsome   compensation   to   the   families   of   the
victims after a very short duration from the offence, however leans
heavily in favour of convict Sanjeev Nanda.   I feel that though the
victims have been compensated but the primarily accountability of the
convict   Sanjeev   Nanda   is   towards   the   society.     The   question   is
whether a man on the road is safe and whether the drunken drivers
would keep on committing such offences.   This accountability to the
society   can   only   be   suitably   answered   if   a   substantial   jail   term   is
provided to him, though it would not be appropriate to award him a
lighter sentence.
The   prosecution   has   argued   that   the   way   the   criminal   justice
system has been polluted by the accused, a very deterrent punishment
should   be   awarded   to   the   convicts.     Sh.   Ramesh   Gupta,   adv.   has
argued that in fact the witnesses like Sunil Kulkarni should also be
punished.     I   am   of   the   opinion   that   Sunil   Kulkarni   himself   had
approached the police and stated that he had seen the incident.   He
repeated his case under
Section 164
CrPC.   His testimony has been
held to be truthful before this court.  However it is true he had filed
false affidavits before Hon'ble High Court at various stages, but this
court cannot punish him for perjury which he has committed in other
courts.     So  far   as   the   hostile   witness  Manoj  Malik   is  concerned  he
himself is a victim of the offence and perhaps he could not withstand
the   pressures   of   influential   persons.
Therefore   I   do   not   intend   to
initiate any proceedings under
Section 340
CrPC against any of the
witnesses.     However   at   the   same   time   I   would   agree   with   the
submissions   of  Ld.   APP.     Till   now  the  courts   had  been  taking  into
consideration only those factors which were attending the offence at
the time of its commission and the antecedents of the convict.   But
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       93
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




now a time has come that a new principle of sentencing has to be
evolved.  Where there is clear proof that the offender had indulged in
winning over the witnesses, a higher quantum of punishment to such
offender is the need of the day.
Balancing all these factors, I award rigorous imprisonment for
five years  to convict  Sanjeev Nanda.   Benefit under
Section 428
CrPC is also given to him.
Sh. S. S. Gandhi, Ld. Senior adv. and Sh. Mohit Mathur, adv.
have argued that the convict is now quite aged and if he is sent to jail,
not   only   his   family   would   suffer   but   also   his   numerous   employees
would   have   suffer   financial   losses.     It   is   further   argued   that   the
offence   of   convict   is   of   minor   nature   and   therefore   the   convict   be
released on probation of good behaviour or with fine.
I   have   considered   the   arguments   of   Ld.   Counsels.     Normally
their plea would have weighed before this court quite heavily but the
question of back side number plate of the car as mentioned by me in
the   judgement   makes   the   intention   of   the   convict   very   very
conspicuous.     In   fact   it   shows   a   shrewed   and   a   calculative   mind.
Therefore   the   washing   of   blood   from   the   car   should   be   seen   in
background of the above stated fact as well as my observations in the
judgement   that   this   convict   had   also   been   able   to   manipulate   the
investigation.     In   these   circumstances,   I   am   not   inclined   to   take   a
lenient view.
I   therefore   sentence   the   convict  Rajeev   Gupta  to   rigorous
imprisonment   for  one   year  and   a   fine   in   the   sum   of  Rs.10,000/­
under
Section 201
IPC.  In default of payment of fine the convict shall
undergo simple imprisonment for one month.
Sh.   G.   P.   Thareja,   adv.   for   convict  Shyam   Singh  and  Bhola
Nath argued that both the convicts are the servants of convict Rajeev
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       94
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




Gupta and they did not have the moral courage to stand up against
the wishes of their employer.   Further more none of them was in a
position to influence investigation or to win over the witnesses.
For the afore said reasons mentioned by me while considering
the quantum of sentence of convict Rajeev Gupta, I am not inclined to
release these convicts on probation of good behaviour.  However I am
of the opinion that the submissions of Sh. G. P. Thareja, adv. are quite
weighty.
Therefore convict Shyam Singh and Bhola Nath deserve a lesser
punishment.   Accordingly I sentence convict Shyam Singh and Bhola
Nath to rigorous imprisonment for six months and a fine in the sum
of  Rs.100/­ each.   In default of payment of fine, each convict shall
undergo simple imprisonment for seven days.
I take this opportunity to say a few words more.  Now when the
heat   of   the   trial   will   cool   and   dust   raised   by   it   settle   down,   it   is
necessary that all the stake holders having stake in the criminal justice
system   fairly   take   a   dispassionate   view   of   the   things   which   have
happened in the  present trial  and also frequently seen in a normal
criminal  trial.     On one  hand Ld. Public  Prosecutor  has pointed  out
towards the conduct of the police, prosecution and the defence.   On
the   other   hand   Ld.   Defence   Counsels   have   vehemently   criticized
electronic media.   It must not be forgotten that blame game would
not lead us anywhere and it would be a wastage of time and energy.
"Blame" is a powerful weapon but "introspection" is the real remedy
having therapeutic quality.   In the entire judgement I have refrained
from touching the details of various incidents, which have a bearing
to discredit the justice delivery system.  Though I am convinced that
institutional   sabotage   of   the   system   has   been   carried   out,   still   a
restrained was observed by this court lest the can of worms is opened
again.   Therefore I referred to a particular fact only where it was of
utmost   necessity.     Better   not   blame   anyone,   rather   take   it   as   an
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       95
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




opportunity for examining our system.  I am reminded of a saying of
Kahlil   Gibran,   who   states   in   his   book  The   Prophet  that  when   a
string   breaks,   the   weaver   does   not   blame   the   string,   rather   he
examines the entire loom.
All  the  advocates  and  senior   advocates appearing   in  this  case
have high standing and have contributed a lot in the field of law.  But
"the best" is yet to come out from them.  Their greatest contribution
(which I believe would definitely be forthcoming) would be that they
rise to the occasion and examine the entire criminal justice system as
well as all the issues including the issues concerning media.   I may
point out that for us the "rule of law" is an article of faith and not a
commodity of convenience.   If we do not keep our faith in the lofty
principle of "rule of law", our future would be like what is being faced
by a few neighbouring countries these days.  With these observations I
close   my   judgement,   while   summing   up   all   the   sentences   again   as
under :
1. The   convict  Sanjeev   Nanda  is   sentenced   to  rigorous
       imprisonment  for  five   years  with   benefit   under
Section   428
CrPC.
2. The   convict  Rajeev   Gupta  is   sentenced   to  rigorous
       imprisonment  for  one   year  and   a   fine   in   the   sum   of
       Rs.10,000/­  under
Section  201
IPC.   In default of payment of
       fine   the   convict   shall   undergo   simple   imprisonment   for  one
       month.
3. The  convicts  Shyam Singh  and  Bhola Nath  are  sentenced  to
       rigorous imprisonment for six months and a fine in the sum of
       Rs.100/­ each.  In default of payment of fine, each convict shall
       undergo simple imprisonment for seven days.
File be consigned to record room.
Announced in the open
 SC No. 25/99, FIR No. 17/99                       96
State Vs Sanjeev Nanda
etc.
Judgement                                                                       Dt. 2.9.2008




court on 5.9.2008.
                                                                        (VINOD KUMAR)
                                                                Additional Sessions Judge
                                                                     Patiala House Courts
                                                                               New Delhi